Title: ForgeTrain: Forging Production-Grade Training Frameworks via Harness-Driven AI Development

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.13645v1

Published Time: Tue, 15 Sep 2026 00:26:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# ForgeTrain: Forging Production-Grade Training Frameworks via Harness-Driven AI Development 

## Qingfeng He ∗

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Zhui Zhu ∗

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Shangzhan Li ∗

Harbin Institute of Technology Harbin, China 

## Yaojian Chen 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Haojun Sun 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Xu Chen 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Leshan Li 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Yifei Shen 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Changjingxing Zhao 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Mengyuan Fan 

Peking University Beijing, China 

## Wenyu Guan 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Yiyun Zheng 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Yuxuan Zuo 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Zhen Li 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Zhenghang Luo 

ModelBest Inc. Beijing, China 

## Yuxuan Li †

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

yxuanl1995@gmail.com 

## Xu Han †

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

han-xu@tsinghua.edu.cn 

## Zhiyuan Liu †

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Training large models still relies on general-purpose frame-works such as Megatron-LM, whose generality tax constrains scenario-specific optimization and adds runtime overhead through accumulated abstraction. AI code generation re-duces the cost of building a framework, and makes it af-fordable to forge one per scenario. We propose Forge Engi-neering: building a dedicated implementation from scratch for each scenario and iteratively optimizing it toward peak performance under correctness and usability constraints. Dedicated implementations inherit no abstraction bound-aries, so they can integrate optimizations across the stack and reach a higher performance ceiling. We instantiate this paradigm for training frameworks as ForgeTrain , which holds a trusted framework as a golden reference and relaxes equivalence monotonically from Bit-for-Bit to Surpass. Ex-periments across multiple model–hardware configurations show that ForgeTrain consistently produces correct train-ing engines and improves MFU over established training frameworks by 4 .7–33 .2%. To our knowledge this is the first production-grade training framework forged end-to-end by AI to match or surpass its human reference. 

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding authors.

## 1 Introduction 

Training a frontier model has become one of the most capital-intensive activities in computing: a single frontier run al-ready costs tens of millions of dollars and is headed toward $1B [3], on top of industry-wide AI-infrastructure capital on the order of $700B in 2026 [17]. The training framework fixes the throughput, the memory footprint, and the model-FLOPs utilization (MFU) of every run. The arithmetic is blunt: against a $700B capital base, raising training performance by a mere 10% is worth at least $70B a year, and every point of MFU a framework loses costs millions per run. Capturing this value means driving each training scenario to its peak performance. In practice, however, training a large model hardly avoids a general-purpose engine such as Megatron-LM [16]. Its megatron/ tree has accumulated abstraction layers, configuration switches, and special-case branches for every model, scale, and device it has ever served (Section 2.1). Yet any one concrete model-and-hardware pair exercises only a small slice of them. This generality tax has two components. (1) Suboptimality : a single framework must serve all scenarios at once, so the tensor sharding, memory layout, operator fusion, and communication schedule that would be optimal for the case at hand are constrained to stay 

> 1arXiv:2609.13645v1 [cs.SE] 12 Sep 2026 Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

viable across all the others; scenario-specific peak perfor-mance is out of reach. (2) Runtime overhead : the abstraction, indirection, and configuration dispatch accumulated to host every scenario erode MFU at every step. The heavier the in-herited baggage, the greater the suboptimality and runtime overhead. The general framework was the rational response to an economic premise. Writing code was expensive and slow, so software engineering maximized reuse of what was al-ready written, and extending a shared framework always beat rewriting one per scenario. Coding agents, however, have driven the cost of writing code sharply down [1, 18], and that changes the calculus. The better move now is to forge a dedicated framework for each scenario, fitted natively to its model and hardware, exempt from both taxes at once. 

Prior AI attempts. Agents have already been set to write entire systems from scratch. VibeTensor [18], the first fully AI-generated deep-learning runtime, was synthesized with-out a reference and runs 1 .7–6 .2× slower than PyTorch [13], because no source of truth forces its global behavior onto a production baseline. Claude’s C compiler [1] was developed under differential testing against GCC and grew to roughly 100K lines that compile the Linux kernel, yet it still delegates assembly and linking to GCC, and its authors state that it is not production-ready. These failures share a diagnosis. Building a complex sys-tem with agents poses three essential problems. Performance must be pushed to the human bar, correctness must hold throughout, and the development itself must stay efficient. Each attempt secures at most two of the three. VibeTensor an-chors neither correctness nor performance, and the compiler holds correctness yet stops short of production performance. A production-grade system requires all three at once, and none has yet emerged. 

ForgeTrain. For training frameworks, we answer with ForgeTrain 1 (Figure 3), an autonomous agent loop that forges a dedicated framework from an empty repository. The loop answers the three problems in turn. 

• How to reach peak performance? The forged frame-work must approach and ultimately surpass the hand-tuned framework it replaces; anything less defeats the purpose of forging. The obstacle, however, is planning rather than capability: agents already forge kernels that rival vendor libraries; what a bare loop cannot do is lay out the path from empty repository to peak as a sequence of steps it can walk. ForgeTrain marks that path with Mile-stones and adjudicates each with a Gate: a real training run comparing training quality and throughput at once. Passing a Gate locks the gain into the baseline, ratcheting measured MFU toward the target round by round.  

> 1Code and forged engines: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/forgetrain_ anon-FE80 .

• How to maintain correctness? A faster framework that trains wrong is worthless, and correctness here is the hard-est thing to adjudicate: it is a global property, surfacing only across whole training trajectories. ForgeTrain there-fore disciplines the forge with a golden reference, a trusted framework such as PyTorch [13], Megatron-LM [16], or MindSpeed [8] held as ground truth, so correctness never needs to be specified from scratch. The crux is the or-der of correctness requirements: it first reproduces the reference’s anchor, the artifacts of its training process, bit for bit, and relaxes the requirement only afterward. Bit-for-bit reproduction delivers a provably correct limit, not just a starting point. Forging under a bar that relaxes gradually from that limit turns debugging from conjecture over global behavior into pointwise comparison, which suppresses the risk of forging wrong. 

• How to forge efficiently? The case for forging rests on the falling cost of writing code, and a loop that spends its rounds on anything but the engine forfeits that advantage. The obstacle is that the optimizations reaching toward the peak are multi-step and pass through worse intermediate states, so a bare loop, rewarded by the Gate one step at a time, stops at the nearest local optimum, while every round lost to a broken build or a drifted dataset is a round not spent on the engine at all. ForgeTrain therefore hard-ens the forging environment, freezing dependencies, build, data, and evaluation, and supplies a knowledge prior, a corpus of optimization experience recording which direc-tions historically pay off and which intermediate costs are worth tolerating. The environment keeps every round on the engine; the prior lets the loop commit to a multi-step optimization before the Gate can reward it. These three answers are ForgeTrain’s method in sum: the performance and correctness answers shape the protocol, the efficiency answer shapes the environment, and together they hold the loop to one trajectory: reproduce the refer-ence exactly, then leave it behind. The underlying paradigm, Forge Engineering, is to build a dedicated implementation from scratch for each scenario and iteratively optimize it toward peak performance under correctness and usability constraints. ForgeTrain instantiates this paradigm for train-ing frameworks. The Harness is itself reused across scenarios: each new model-and-hardware pair starts a fresh forge, draw-ing on the same construction knowledge and executable eval-uations. As coding costs fall, this approach makes scenario-specific construction increasingly viable, just as falling de-sign cost once pushed hardware from general-purpose CPUs toward domain-specific architectures [6]. 

Results. From an empty repository, ForgeTrain forges a dedicated ForgeEngine for seven model–hardware settings, the same Harness retargeted across two vendors: Megatron-LM on NVIDIA H100 and MindSpeed on Ascend 910 NPUs. Every engine surpasses its reference, by 4 .7–33 .2% MFU at       

> 2ForgeTrain 015 30 45 60 MFU (%) Qwen3 0.6B CPM4 0.5B CPM5 1B CPM5 16B-A3B CPM4 8B CPM5 1B CPM5 130M 46.2 (+9.1%) 46.1 (+4.9%) 50.8 (+4.7%) 27.6 (+17.7%) 51.2 (+5.2%) 46.4 (+15.5%) 30.6 (+33.2%)
> Megatron-LM / MindSpeed ForgeTrain, H100 ForgeTrain, Ascend

Figure 1. Framework-level MFU of each ForgeEngine against its golden reference; relative gain annotated. matched training quality (Figure 1), and its forged FlashAt-tention and GEMM kernels run level with FlashAttention-3 and cuBLAS. Correctness is validated on the three engines carried into long-horizon training, including MiniCPM4 0.5B, MiniCPM5 1B, and MiniCPM5 130M, each holding loss parity with its reference through the run and downstream parity with the reference-trained baseline. Concretely, we make three contributions: 

• We propose Forge Engineering , a paradigm for build-ing systems software from scratch for each scenario and iteratively optimizing the implementation toward peak performance under correctness and usability constraints. A reusable Harness supports this process through con-struction knowledge and executable evaluations. 

• We propose ForgeTrain , which instantiates Forge En-gineering for training frameworks. A trusted framework serves as the golden reference: the loop first reproduces its training artifacts bit for bit, then relaxes the requirement stage by stage to training-quality parity, so the forged engine first equals the reference and then beats it. Mile-stones and the Gate drive the throughput gains; long-run validation checks correctness after each relaxation; a hard-ened environment and a knowledge prior keep the loop efficient. 

• We deliver ForgeEngine , the per-scenario engines Forge-Train forges: they match their golden reference on training quality and surpass it by 4 .7–33 .2% in throughput, and we run MiniCPM4 0.5B’s decay phase with its engine to downstream-evaluation parity with a Megatron-trained baseline. To our knowledge this is the first production-grade training framework forged end-to-end by AI to match or surpass its human reference. 

## 2 Background 

2.1 Generality Tax and Forge Engineering 

Megatron-LM [16] makes the generality tax concrete. The framework’s source code has grown over time to accommo-date new models, scales, and devices, and has accumulated layers of abstraction, configuration switches, and special-case branches. Any one concrete model-and-hardware pair, however, exercises only a small slice of them. Two measure-ments make the tax visible. First, suboptimality: across the 128 ,275 lines of its megatron directory in core_v0.15.0 ,roughly one line in every 134 is a configuration branch on 

args , config , or self.config . The tensor sharding, mem-ory layout, operator fusion, and communication schedule that would be optimal for the case at hand are constrained to stay viable for all the scenarios the framework serves. Second, runtime overhead: the abstraction built to host those scenar-ios is equally deep. Whereas a dedicated engine can invoke the kernel directly, a single QKV projection traverses seven Python module boundaries before reaching the GEMM, in-cluding GPTModel , the block, layer, and attention modules, a Transformer Engine wrapper layer, an autograd.Function ,and the aten dispatcher (Appendix J). Communication–computation overlap illustrates the sub-optimality this generality imposes. Megatron-LM’s tensor-parallel overlap relies on the process-wide environment vari-able CUDA_DEVICE_MAX_CONNECTIONS being set to 1: with a single hardware queue, the all-gather issued ahead of the GEMM is guaranteed to be scheduled first, and the frame-work asserts this value whenever tensor or context par-allelism is enabled. Expert-parallel overlap for MoE mod-els needs a value larger than 1, so that dispatch commu-nication and expert computation can actually run concur-rently. When a MoE model uses both forms of parallelism, the framework can only warn that the user should “set 

CUDA_DEVICE_MAX_CONNECTIONS to 1 or 32, depending on which parallelization you want to prioritize.” Both overlaps are implemented and each is optimal in isolation, yet a sin-gle global knob that must remain valid for every scenario forces the combined case to forfeit one of them. A dedicated implementation for a fixed workload can instead express the required ordering through explicit stream and event depen-dencies and obtain both overlaps at once. Forge Engineering uses this freedom to build a dedicated implementation from scratch and iteratively optimize it to-ward peak performance under correctness and usability con-straints. The deployment scenario specifies the workload, hardware, and operational requirements. Iteration proceeds through implementation, execution, evaluation, and revision; each accepted candidate must satisfy the applicable correct-ness and usability checks. A trusted reference anchors the behavior to preserve. The Harness supports this process with reusable construction knowledge and executable evaluations, allowing the same process to guide separate implementations across scenarios. ForgeTrain instantiates this paradigm for training infrastructure. 

2.2 Coding Agents and Harness 

A coding agent is a language model that acts through tool calls: it inspects a repository, edits files, and invokes build and test commands. These calls become a development process only under an agent harness, or scaffold, which supplies the          

> 3Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu (a) General framework
> one implementation serves 𝑁 scenarios — choices stay open at run time
> Suboptimality Runtime overhead
> one setting
> ×optimal for none
> 128,275 lines of code a config branch every 134 lines
> training step
> GPTModel TransformerBlock TransformerLayer SelfAttention TE wrapper autograd.Function aten dispatch
> GEMM
> ×7 module boundaries
> specialize vertically integrate
> ✓optimal for it training step
> one execution path
> GEMM
> 3 passes →1 kernel
> (b) Forge engineering
> one scenario — choices close at build time

Figure 2. The two forms of the generality tax (top) and the two freedoms that answer them one for one (bottom). 

★ marks each scenario’s own optimal setting. execution loop, tools, context management, and instructions that enable a model to act. Restrained by that loop, an agent revises its implementation using execution feedback, and can take on complex, often multi-file software-engineering tasks that take human professionals hours or days, as SWE-Bench Pro evaluates [4]; it can even forge low-level operators, with Sakana’s CUDA Engineer synthesizing thousands of test-verified CUDA kernels [9]. The general harness turns the model into a sustained developer rather than a single-turn responder: across con-text windows the agent must recover project state, iden-tify unfinished work, preserve progress, and verify changes. Anthropic’s harness for long-running coding agents sup-ports exactly this, where an initializer prepares the environ-ment and feature list while later sessions make incremental changes, test them, and leave progress records and Git com-mits for subsequent sessions [19]. Harnesses are, however, not one-size-fits-all: task-specific harnesses adapt the loop and its evaluation to a domain. For training infrastructure, correctness is a global prop-erty of an entire optimization run rather than of any local unit test, and it must be judged alongside throughput. Forge-Train therefore provides a task-specific Harness that orga-nizes construction through Milestones and executable Gates, progressing from exact reproduction of reference anchors to performance optimization under training-quality constraints. Section 3 describes the protocol. 

## 3 ForgeTrain: Method 

3.1 Overview: The Agent Loop and the Golden Reference 

ForgeTrain turns one training scenario into a framework built for that scenario alone (Figure 3a). Its inputs are a golden reference (PyTorch [13], Megatron-LM [16], or Mind-Speed [8]) and a thin per-scenario configuration: a reference script that drives the golden reference and a single TOML file describing the target model and hardware. The Harness, the one component reused across every forge, guides and constrains a coding agent through the build, and what the agent yields is a dedicated ForgeEngine fitted to that scenario and to nothing else. No human stands inside the loop: once started, the agent generates, runs, and revises the framework on its own. Prior to the forging loop, the agent instantiates a scenario-specific Harness. Working from the reference script and the TOML, it runs the golden reference once and captures the artifacts of that run as the bit-for-bit anchors the engine will be held to, and it writes the concrete Milestone and Gate scripts for the target model, hardware, and parallel configu-ration. Once forging begins, these scripts are frozen on the Harness side, out of the develop agent’s reach (§3.2). Forg-ing then unfolds in two distinct stages. The first demands an exact match at every anchor: the agent loop establishes a bit-for-bit implementation of the training behavior the golden reference specifies. The second relaxes that demand to training-quality parity, and the agent uses the resulting reference-anchored evidence to guide performance optimiza-tions whose numerical paths may differ (Table 1). The objective is realized through repeated forging rounds (Figure 3b): the develop agent proposes a change, the Harness evaluates it against the active milestone, and the review agent verifies the implementation and the evaluation path. The measured outcome then determines the context of the next round. A training framework decomposes into two layers, and the loop proceeds through both. The framework layer holds the pipeline, communication, optimizer-state, and schedul-ing code that treats each operator as a unit; beneath it, the operator layer holds the kernels the pipeline invokes. Both layers are forged under the same discipline, and the agent uses profiling evidence to select operators for further opti-mization after the framework layer is established. The forged engines along these two layers are analyzed in §4.2.1–§4.2.2. The following subsections describe the performance pro-tocol (§3.2), the correctness chain (§3.3), and the mechanisms for efficient forging (§3.4). 

3.2 Peak Performance: Milestones and the Gate 

For a coding agent, reaching peak performance is primarily a planning problem rather than an implementation problem. 

> 4

ForgeTrain Golden reference 

> PyTorch / Megatron-LM / MindSpeed
> Reference
> script Scenario
> TOML
> instantiate

Harness        

> Agent loop (b)
> Knowledge prior Milestones Evaluation
> forge
> ForgeEngine
> per-scenario, regenerated
> (a) Pipeline Develop Agent
> forge
> Implementation
> Training pipeline Kernel fusion Overlap CUDA graphs Kernel forge ... more
> evaluate
> Gate
> verdict
> Review Agent
> Pass / next round Fail / rollback
> (b) The loop 1. Bit-for-Bit
> Reference Candidate
> 1100111100110000
> bit-identical: max_abs_diff = 0
> 2. Surpass Quality parity + higher throughput
> Higher MFU
> reference Rounds
> Quality parity
> Loss Reference Candidate Steps
> (c) Targets
> criteria Golden reference
> PyTorch / Megatron-LM / MindSpeed
> Reference
> script Scenario
> TOML
> instantiate

Harness        

> Agent loop (b)
> Knowledge prior Milestones Evaluation
> forge
> ForgeEngine
> per-scenario, regenerated
> (a) Pipeline Develop Agent
> forge
> Implementation
> Training pipeline Kernel fusion Overlap CUDA graphs Kernel forge ... more
> evaluate
> Gate
> verdict
> Review Agent
> Pass / next round Fail / rollback
> (b) The loop 1. Bit-for-Bit
> Reference Candidate
> 1100111100110000
> bit-identical: max_abs_diff = 0
> 2. Surpass Quality parity + higher throughput
> Higher MFU
> reference Rounds
> Quality parity
> Loss Reference Candidate Steps
> (c) Targets
> criteria

Figure 3. ForgeTrain at a glance. (a) The Harness turns a golden reference and a thin per-scenario configuration into a ForgeEngine; (b) the forge–evaluate–verdict loop that builds it; (c) the targets the Gate enforces: bit-for-bit identity, then higher MFU with a loss curve that tracks the baseline. 

Table 1. The three phases of a forge. 

Phase Equivalence demanded Freedom granted Success criterion 

0: Instantiation — — Milestones, Gate scripts, and bit-for-bit anchors in place 1: Bit-for-Bit Bit-level identity None beyond the reference Exact match at every anchor 2: Surpass Training-quality parity Restructure, fuse, rewrite Quality parity, higher throughput 

Frontier agents can already implement many local optimiza-tions, including specialized kernels [9, 10] and large sys-tem components [1], but local capability does not determine which dependent changes to attempt or how to organize them into a complete path from an empty repository to peak throughput. ForgeTrain addresses this gap with Milestones and Gates. 

Milestone decomposition. A Milestone is an interme-diate target verified against the golden reference, and the decomposition is recursive: a long-range target splits into sub-goals, each sub-goal into shorter steps, until every step is short enough for the develop agent to complete and the reference to check. The decomposition is designed for the capabilities and dependencies of the target model, hardware, and parallel configuration, so different scenarios may ex-pose different intermediate milestones. It is written at in-stantiation (§3.1): the MiniCPM4 8B scenario, for instance, carries a Milestone in which the agent implements tensor parallelism on its own, whereas the 0.5B scenario needs no tensor parallelism and carries a data-parallelism Milestone in its place. During reference reproduction, a Milestone can be an operator-level checkpoint; during performance opti-mization, it can be an intermediate performance objective. Milestones are therefore the finest granularity at which the loop advances, and the decomposition fixes both how the work proceeds and when each piece of it may be admitted. The Forge Loop is precisely this progression: round by round, the agent advances through the sequence of Milestones. 

The Gate. A Gate is the Harness-controlled verdict on whether a candidate implementation satisfies a prescribed condition, measured in a real training run. Milestones set the targets; Gates decide when a target counts as reached, so every Milestone is closed by a Gate that checks its advance-ment condition, such as training quality within bounds and throughput at the mark for a performance Milestone. Over a multi-round performance optimization the Gate serves three functions. First, measured positioning: every verdict returns the candidate’s measured quality and throughput, so the de-velop agent judges its progress from data rather than from an unverified performance estimate. Second, actionable failure: a rejection states whether the problem is training quality out of bounds or speedup short of the mark, which gives the next round a concrete direction. Third, safe accumulation: optimizations that pass are written into the current baseline and become the starting point of later rounds, while failed changes are rolled back whole, so performance already won is preserved without carrying a failed exploration into the state that follows. The performance target is set above the current implementation and no single optimization reaches 

5Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu 

it, so MFU rises through successive measurement and admis-sion (Figure 3c). A capable agent may try to hack a Milestone’s Gate rather than earn it, so the Harness enforces a privilege split: the agent can only edit the candidate implementation, while Gate conditions, run shapes, and reference-side artifacts belong to the Harness and stay out of its reach. The review agent additionally audits for proxy execution, fabricated metrics, altered workloads, or weakened evaluation logic. Progress can therefore come only from candidate changes that pass the prescribed Gates. 

3.3 Correctness: The Equivalence Chain and Long-Run Validation 

Every step of performance presupposes correctness, and at this scale a training framework’s correctness is a global property. Collective communication, optimizer-state man-agement, mixed-precision policy, and scheduling go wrong in ways that surface only across an entire training trajec-tory, never in a local unit test. The requirement is moreover double: the framework must reproduce the golden reference exactly to be trustworthy, yet diverge from it to be faster. No fixed target is at once “equal to” and “better than” the reference. The equivalence chain resolves the tension by sep-arating the two requirements in time, descending a lattice of equivalence relations from bit-level identity to training-quality parity; relaxation is one-way and happens at stage granularity, which is one level coarser than the Milestones of §3.2. The order carries the argument: before any optimiza-tion begins, the engine agrees with the reference to the bit at every anchor captured during instantiation, so any error a later rewrite introduces localizes to a concrete deviation at a concrete tensor rather than a guess about global behavior. This progression has not, to our knowledge, been articu-lated as a methodology: prior reference-anchored work uses the reference only for differential testing, and reference-free synthesis has no reference to tighten against. 

Bit-for-Bit: zero-tolerance adjudication. The anchors are the artifacts of the golden reference’s own training run on the target scenario, captured at instantiation as machine-checkable assertions: the activations, the gradients, the opti-mizer states, the loss-scaling trajectory, and the collective-communication pattern, together with the invariants over their ordering (a given all-reduce must complete before the corresponding parameter update). They are taken at per-operator granularity, at exact numerical values, and over the edge cases production must survive but unit tests omit (gradient overflow and loss-scale backoff, checkpoint save-and-restore across a parallelism change, the first step after resumption); weaker anchors admit an implementation cor-rect under normal inputs yet silently wrong in production. The anchor set is discovered by the agent’s own instrumen-tation rather than curated by hand. The forged framework must then clear those anchors with exact equivalence: given identical inputs and seeds, every anchored tensor satisfies 

max_abs_diff = 0. One deviating bit at any anchor is fail-ure. We demand this over the usual loss-curve agreement because it rules out agreement for the wrong reasons: cancel-ing errors, an unstable kernel passing on a benign input, and a wrong reduction order hidden inside an acceptable loss can each fool a curve-level comparison, but none survives zero tolerance. Any deviation is reported as a localized defect to be fixed, never an optimization to be kept. Our single-node, eight-GPU ForgeEngine build clears the full anchor set at roughly 80% of Megatron-LM’s throughput: slower, but provably computing the reference’s result. 

Long-run validation: holding parity after the relax-ation. The Surpass stage then drops the equivalence one notch to training-quality parity, and the develop agent may restructure freely, fusing operators, reordering reductions, overlapping communication, and rewriting recomputation policies. These moves break the bit-level anchors, so the enforcement of correctness passes to the real training run be-hind every gate (§3.2), read through sensitive indicators: the loss trajectory must coincide with the baseline within run-to-run variation, downstream evaluation must hold under an identical fine-tuning recipe, and gradient-norm statistics, which are more sensitive to numerical perturbation than the loss, expose a deviation before it reaches the loss, pinning the error to the round that introduced it. The runs must be long because a framework’s errors, such as a wrong reduc-tion order or a subtle mixed-precision slip, are invisible in a single step and accumulate only over a trajectory. And the criterion is valid only in this order: first prove the engine computes the quantities the reference intends, then allow it to compute them by a different numerical route. 

3.4 Forging Efficiency: The Environment and the Knowledge Prior 

The protocol above answers what each step should do and whether it was done right; forging efficiency decides how many rounds those steps take. A loop that spends rounds on anything but the artifact erodes the near-zero forging cost the enterprise rests on, and the waste comes from two places, friction in the environment and detours in the search. ForgeTrain answers each with one design. 

A hardened forging environment. The first waste has nothing to do with the artifact: a dependency that fails to install, a build that breaks intermittently, an evaluation entry point that does not reproduce. Every round the develop agent loses to such accidents is pure loss, and the accidents cascade: one mis-installed dependency contaminates every verdict after it. The Harness therefore hardens the environment up front: dependencies, build, data, and evaluation entry points are frozen at instantiation (§3.1), before the loop starts, and the fully codified evaluation of §3.2 pays a second dividend here, since a verdict that cannot be argued with can also be triggered cheaply at any moment. Every round the develop 

> 6ForgeTrain

agent spends therefore goes into the engine itself rather than into the surrounding infrastructure. 

The knowledge prior. The second waste comes from the search itself. The rewrites that approach the peak are multi-step and their intermediate states are worse: a fusion pays off only after the memory layout is also changed; a reduction reorder helps only once communication is overlapped. An unaided search stops at the nearest local optimum, because the gain lies past a run of worse candidates. The Gate ad-mits each of those stopped steps as it should, but it does not supply the next one. The limit here is not capability: a frontier coding agent can write each of these rewrites, but it will not commit to a sequence whose early steps measure worse. The knowledge prior addresses this by raising the search’s effective learning rate. It is a durable corpus of opti-mization experience the develop agent consults, recording which aggressive directions pay off in a given regime, which intermediate costs are worth tolerating, and which changes compound. Consulting it leads the develop agent to accept a run of worse candidates and reach the optimum beyond them. Every such attempt still passes the Gate, so the prior widens the search without weakening correctness: the prior determines what the loop attempts, the Gate what is admit-ted. The prior itself never writes code, and it lives in the Harness rather than in the forged framework, leaving the zero-human-written-code discipline intact. The three groups of mechanisms are independent of one another: each governs a different property of the forge, and none weakens the guarantees the other two provide. To-gether they are what makes the match-then-surpass progres-sion against the golden reference executable by an imperfect agent. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Setup 

We evaluate ForgeTrain through three experiments. The first measures performance by comparing the MFU reached during forging with established training frameworks. The second checks correctness by carrying the forged engines through end-to-end forging and production training. The third evaluates the usefulness of the Harness by conducting a forging task after removing selected Harness components. Sections 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 describe these experiments in this order. 

Hardware and software. We conduct the experiments on two platforms: NVIDIA H100 GPUs and Huawei Ascend 910 NPUs. On H100, we use PyTorch 2.8.0 with CUDA 12.9, cuDNN 9.10.02 [2], and NCCL 2.27.3. The forged H100 en-gines use Transformer Engine 2.4 [12], and the hand-written operators use CUTLASS 4.5.0 [11]. On Ascend, we use Py-Torch 2.7.1+cpu with CANN 8.5.0 and torch_npu 2.7.1. All experiments use a sequence length of 4096 and the mixed-precision settings specified for the corresponding platform. Model architectures are given in Appendix B for the H100 settings and Appendix H for the Ascend settings; the parallel degrees and batch sizes for each setting are in Table 2. 

Performance experiment. We forge training frame-works for seven model–hardware settings. On H100, we use the official Claude Opus 5 agent (1M-token context window) with ForgeTrain to forge Qwen3 0.6B, MiniCPM4 0.5B, MiniCPM5 1B, MiniCPM5 16B A3B, and MiniCPM4 8B. We compare their MFU with Megatron-LM 0.15 [16]. On Ascend, we forge MiniCPM5 1B and MiniCPM5 130M and compare their MFU with their golden references, MindSpeed on Megatron core 0.12.1 and PyTorch respectively. MiniCPM4 0.5B and MiniCPM5 1B on H100 and MiniCPM5 1B on Ascend each carry a one-layer MTP (Eagle) head; the other settings train without MTP. Table 2 collects the framework configurations and the corresponding MFU trajectories. 

Correctness experiment. On H100, we use Claude Opus 4.6 to forge a MiniCPM4 0.5B engine, with Megatron-LM as the golden reference. We run the forged engine through the decay phase of pretraining, then fine-tune the resulting checkpoint with Megatron-LM and evaluate it on downstream benchmarks. On Ascend, we use Opus 4.6 with a 1M-token context window to forge the MiniCPM5 1B engine (with a one-layer MTP head) with MindSpeed as the golden reference, and GLM-5.2 with a 1M-token context window to forge the MiniCPM5 130M engine with PyTorch as the golden reference. We run decay training with the 1B engine and a complete stable–decay–SFT training pipeline with the 130M engine, and evaluate the resulting checkpoints of both on downstream benchmarks. 

Ablation experiment. We use Claude Opus 5 with a 1M-token context window for two ablations on H100. We remove the Harness entirely for MiniCPM5 16B A3B, and re-move the quality constraints while retaining the Milestones for MiniCPM4 0.5B. We use the corresponding complete-Harness runs in Section 4.2 as comparisons. 

Metric. We report throughput as model-FLOPs utilization (MFU), computed from an exact per-operator FLOP count rather than the usual closed-form approximation (the full expression is given in Appendix C). The same expression and the same peak-times-devices denominator are used for the forged engine and for the baseline. 

4.2 Main MFU Results 

We first report framework-level performance across seven model–hardware settings, then present the kernels selected and forged by the agent during the MiniCPM4 0.5B run. We conclude with an analysis of the framework and kernel implementations. 

4.2.1 Framework-Level Forging. ForgeTrain surpasses the corresponding Megatron-LM or MindSpeed baseline across all seven model–hardware settings (Tables 2), with 

> 7Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

relative MFU gains of 4 .7%–33 .2%. The dense H100 mod-els gain approximately 5%–9%, while MiniCPM5 16B A3B and the Ascend models show larger improvements of about 16%–33%. Table 2 shows how each setting reaches that re-sult. Forging cost has two readings: the round at which the engine first passes its baseline, roughly 12–20 on H100 and 3–5 on Ascend, and the round at which it peaks, the last checkpoint 𝑘 reported for each setting in Table 2. These re-sults demonstrate that scenario-specific forging can improve performance across both hardware platforms. 

4.2.2 Operator-Level Forging. This section analyzes the operator forge carried out as part of the H100 MiniCPM4 0.5B correctness experiment. The framework and operator results reported here come from the same no-MTP MiniCPM4 0.5B forge. The agent first profiles the training step to identify the operators that account for the largest runtime cost. The profile (Table 3) leads the agent to select five GEMM variants and the attention core for further forging. The GEMMs cover the QKV projection, output projection, and the two FFN projections. For attention, the agent forges both the forward and backward kernels. The optimization families these forgings instantiate are cataloged in Appendix E. For each selected operator, the agent writes a specialized implementation for the shapes issued by the MiniCPM4 0.5B training step. Each implementation is checked against the corresponding reference computation before it is included in the forged engine. The resulting kernels are then compared with the corresponding vendor implementations at the target shapes (Table 4). 

GEMM results. The agent-forged CuTeDSL kernels re-main close to cuBLAS on most target shapes and surpass it on several forward and backward passes. The strongest results occur for the attention-output and FFN projections. For example, the forged attention-output backward kernel reaches 73 .0% MFU, compared with 71 .5% for cuBLAS. 

Attention results. The forged FlashAttention forward trails cuDNN, FlashAttention-3, and FlashAttention-4 but leads Transformer Engine, while the forged backward leads every baseline, including FlashAttention-3 and FlashAttention-4. This backward result is especially signifi-cant because attention backward carries twice the FLOPs of forward; Appendix D traces the full forging trajectory of this backward kernel, from the naive atomic-accumulate baseline to the final warped-specialized, layout-refactored implementation. The attention contribution therefore comes mainly from the backward kernel rather than from a uniform improvement in both directions. 

End-to-end result. After the selected GEMM and FlashAttention kernels are integrated into the same correctness-forged framework, the complete MiniCPM4 0.5B engine reaches 44 .13% MFU, compared with 41 .66% before operator-level forging. The operator stage therefore adds 2 .47 percentage points of end-to-end MFU. 

4.2.3 Sources of the Speedup. The forged 0.5B engine’s advantage over Megatron-LM 0.15 comes from three sources. The first is a reproduced standard set : optimizations that exist in Megatron with the same boundaries, reproduced compo-nent for component, including bucketed reduce-scatter over-lapped with backward, ZeRO-1 optimizer sharding, fused RMSNorm, RoPE, SwiGLU, and cross-entropy kernels, and a direct Transformer-Engine attention path. The harness redis-covered them in the first nine steps of the framework-level optimization trajectory (Table 8, Appendix A). The second is vertical integration : components that Mega-tron also has but keeps as separate stages, which the forged engine merges into a single execution path for the fixed sce-nario. Megatron’s optimizer tail runs gradient clipping, the Adam update, and the FP32-to-BF16 parameter copy as three passes over every parameter; the forged engine fuses them into one Triton kernel with a single pass. Likewise, rather than graphing individual transformer layers, the forged en-gine captures a whole microbatch’s forward, loss, and back-ward as one CUDA Graph replay. The third is deep customization : scenario-specific points with no counterpart in Megatron, where the forged engine rewrites the execution path around the fixed model, shapes, and parallel layout. Optimizer scalars and the clipping coeffi-cient stay on the device, so the step never synchronizes with the host; the loss all-reduce is moved off the critical path; and the read-only and layout-specific paths are specialized to the fixed shapes. Each mechanism’s source locations, configuration gates, and the per-step MFU delta it contributes are detailed in Appendix F. 

4.3 End-to-End Correctness Validation 

We evaluate ForgeTrain’s correctness end to end by using the forged engines for real production training and com-paring their training trajectories, resulting checkpoints, and downstream model quality with those of the trusted refer-ence implementations described in Section 4.1. The engines under test are the framework-forged engines running at full production throughput: the MiniCPM4 0.5B engine trains at 41 .66% MFU on 16 ×H100 against 40 .3% for Megatron-LM (Figure 4 traces how forging raised it from 30 .45% to this level), and the MiniCPM5 1B and MiniCPM5 130M engines train on Ascend 910 at 37 .0% MFU on 32 devices (DP = 32) against 33 .6% for MindSpeed and at 24 .9% MFU on 2 devices (DP = 2) against 23 .0% for MindSpeed. In wall-clock terms, the MiniCPM4 0.5B engine first passed Megatron-LM after roughly ten hours of forging and reached this level after two to three further days. 

4.3.1 Training-Trajectory Agreement. We compare loss trajectories under matched checkpoints, data, and schedules. Figure 5 summarizes the three runs. For MiniCPM4 0.5B, we 

> 8ForgeTrain

Table 2. Framework configurations and MFU trajectories during forging. Par. gives the data (DP), tensor (TP), and expert (EP) parallel degrees; GBS and MBS are global and micro-batch size; per-model details are in Appendix B. 𝑘 indexes a setting’s accepted forging rounds (Appendix A); a slash marks a run that ended before that checkpoint. MiniCPM4 0.5B and MiniCPM5 1B on H100 and MiniCPM5 1B on Ascend carry a one-layer MTP (Eagle) head; the remaining settings train without MTP.                                                                                                                                    

> Setting Par. GBS MBS Baseline (%) MFU (%) at checkpoint 𝑘 Final (%) Gain
> H100 (Megatron-LM) 𝑘 =4𝑘 =8𝑘 =12 𝑘 =16 𝑘 =20 𝑘 =24 𝑘 =28 𝑘 =32 𝑘 =36 Qwen3-0.6B DP2 80 10 42 .436 .236 .344 .345 .446 .345 .646 .8//46 .2+9.1% MiniCPM4-0.5B DP2 80 10 43 .925 .036 .944 .245 .246 .1////46 .1+4.9% MiniCPM5-1B DP2 80 448 .543 .644 .9///////50 .8+4.7% MiniCPM5-16B-A3B EP8 32 423 .518 .422 .223 .023 .724 .724 .125 .926 .727 .627 .6+17 .7% MiniCPM4-8B DP4 TP2 32 248 .723 .144 .546 .147 .250 .9////51 .2+5.2%
> Ascend 910 (MindSpeed) 𝑘 =1𝑘 =3𝑘 =5𝑘 =7𝑘 =9𝑘 =11 𝑘 =13 𝑘 =15 𝑘 =17 MiniCPM5-1B DP2 80 240 .230 .144 .846 .346 .4/////46 .4+15 .5% MiniCPM5-130M DP2 80 523 .010 .022 .627 .129 .429 .930 .430 .6//30 .6+33 .2%

Table 3. Operator time budget of a steady-state training step (bfloat16; forward +backward +optimizer, averaged over 5 profiled steps). Shares are of GPU compute time, communi-cation excluded; the GEMM row covers forward, dgrad, and wgrad.      

> Operator class Share of step
> GEMM ( qkv /o/fc1 /fc2 /lm-head )55 .9% Attention core (cuDNN FlashAttention fwd +bwd) 16 .6% Elementwise (RMSNorm, RoPE, activation, Adam) 24 .4% Other (Triton concat, sort) 3.1%

Table 4. Forged-kernel throughput (MFU, %) at the 0.5B engine’s own shapes (H100, bfloat16; weight gradients accu-mulated in FP32). FA-3 and FA-4 are FlashAttention-3 [15] and FlashAttention-4 [20]; TE is Transformer Engine. “n/a” marks passes the fused qkv /output backward kernel does not expose separately. Bold marks the best value in each comparison (ties within 0 .1 pp both bold).                                        

> (a) Attention Direction Forged cuDNN FA-3 FA-4 TE
> Forward 42.6 47.8 44.3 43.7 39.0 Backward 45.7 35.0 43.4 43.3 36.2
> (b) GEMM (forged / cuBLAS) Operator Forward Backward dgrad wgrad
> qkv 69.7/ 69.9 68.4/ 73.7 72.9 /72.8 62.4/ 71.6
> attn-out 70.8 /69.8 73.0 /71.5 69.9 /69.9 72.7 /69.3
> fc1 77.1 /74.2 81.4 /81.5 81.9/ 82.1 83.3 /81.1
> fc2 80.2/ 80.5 79.9 /78.9 76.9 /76.9 83.3 /81.7
> output 67.5/ 67.9 73.6 /70.4 n/a / 75.9 n/a / 66.1

resume the decay phase from a shared stable-phase check-point and compare with Megatron-LM. For MiniCPM5 1B, 

Figure 4. Framework-level forging trajectory of the MiniCPM4 0.5B engine on 16 ×H100. Each point is an ac-cepted optimization step; MFU rises from 30 .45% to 41 .66% and crosses the Megatron-LM baseline of 40 .3% (dashed) af-ter the kernel-fusion steps give way to overlap, bucketing, and CUDA-graph optimizations. This is the engine used for the MiniCPM4 0.5B correctness runs below. we resume from the same 480k-step checkpoint and run the same 48,000-step decay schedule on Ascend; the final losses are 1 .3227 and 1 .3226. For MiniCPM5 130M, the forged engine runs the complete stable–decay–SFT pipeline on As-cend, and its loss trajectory is compared with a PyTorch reference over the same schedule. The final SFT losses are 0.845 and 0 .861. 

4.3.2 Downstream Model Quality. For MiniCPM4 0.5B, we fine-tune the decay-phase checkpoints from both runs with the same Megatron-LM SFT procedure and evaluate the resulting models on six benchmarks. This keeps SFT fixed and isolates the effect of the pretraining engine. The model trained with the forged engine matches or exceeds the Megatron baseline on five of the six benchmarks. For MiniCPM5 1B on Ascend, we evaluate the checkpoints produced by the two decay runs in Section 4.3.1 on eight 

> 9Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

Figure 5. Loss trajectories for the three long-horizon com-parisons: MiniCPM4 0.5B decay on H100, MiniCPM5 1B decay on Ascend 910, and the complete MiniCPM5 130M stable–decay–SFT run on Ascend 910. benchmarks, covering Chinese and English knowledge (C-Eval, MMLU-Redux), code (HumanEval, MBPP), mathemati-cal reasoning (GSM8K, MATH-500), general reasoning (BBH), and instruction following (IFEval). Table 6 reports the results. The model trained with the forged engine exceeds the Mind-Speed baseline on four benchmarks and trails it on the other four. For MiniCPM5 130M on Ascend, both the forged engine and the PyTorch reference run the complete stable–decay– SFT pipeline in Section 4.3.1, so this comparison also covers the SFT stage. We evaluate the final checkpoints on five Eng-lish benchmarks spanning general reasoning (BBH), mathe-matical reasoning (GSM8K, MATH), and code (HumanEval, 

Table 5. Downstream evaluation of MiniCPM4 0.5B on H100 after the same decay schedule with Megatron-LM and with the forged engine, followed by identical Megatron-LM SFT. 

Benchmark Megatron ForgeTrain Δ

CMMLU 65.23 65.69 +0.46 MBPP (sanitized) 57.98 57.98 0.00 GSM8K 49.96 50.95 +0.99 MATH (PRM800K-500) 31.00 32.20 +1.20 IFEval 50.65 50.28 −0.37 C-Eval (CoT) 64.16 65.94 +1.78 

Average 53.16 53.84 +0.68 

Table 6. Downstream evaluation of MiniCPM5 1B on Ascend 910 after the same decay schedule with MindSpeed and with the forged engine. 

Benchmark MindSpeed ForgeTrain Δ

C-Eval 37.10 35.53 −1.57 MMLU-Redux 42.90 42.41 −0.49 HumanEval 36.59 37.20 +0.61 MBPP (sanitized) 44.75 48.25 +3.50 GSM8K 58.91 54.59 −4.32 MATH-500 30.20 31.40 +1.20 BBH 26.72 22.01 −4.71 IFEval 34.01 34.38 +0.37 

Average 38.90 38.22 −0.68 

Table 7. Downstream evaluation of MiniCPM5 130M on Ascend 910 after the complete stable–decay–SFT pipeline with the PyTorch ( torch_npu ) reference and with the forged engine. 

Benchmark PyTorch ForgeTrain Δ

BBH 32.93 32.08 −0.85 GSM8K 17.29 18.42 +1.13 MATH 9.80 10.20 +0.40 HumanEval 20.12 21.34 +1.22 MBPP 34.63 37.35 +2.72 

Average 22.95 23.88 +0.93 

MBPP). Table 7 reports the results. The model trained with the forged engine exceeds the reference on four of the five benchmarks. Across the three comparisons, the average dif-ference stays within one point and changes sign, so the forged engines are interchangeable with their references at the level of downstream quality on both hardware ecosys-tems. 

> 10 ForgeTrain

Figure 6. MiniCPM4 0.5B forging without quality con-straints. The dashed line is the complete-Harness engine of Section 4.2.1, at 46 .1% on the same 2 ×H100 setting. 

4.4 Ablation 

We examine two reduced settings with Claude Opus 5 (1M-token context window) on H100. The first removes the Har-ness for the MiniCPM5 16B A3B task in Section 4.2.1. The second retains the Milestones but removes the quality con-straints for MiniCPM4 0.5B. Each is compared with the com-plete Harness on its corresponding model; the two ablations address different failure modes. 

Without the Harness. During the MiniCPM5 16B A3B implementation, the agent reduces optimizer precision from FP32 to BF16 to accelerate training. This changes the nu-merical computation of the optimizer, so throughput alone cannot establish that the resulting engine preserves training quality. The run therefore provides no verified performance gain at training-quality parity. 

Without quality constraints. On MiniCPM4 0.5B, MFU remains near 37% within 33 forging rounds, far below the 46 .1% that the complete Harness reaches for the same setting (Table 2). Figure 6 shows the available trajectory through round 32. The agent’s reasoning repeatedly treats Bit-for-Bit agreement as a restriction on optimization. In round 18, it rules out changing deterministic attention backward be-cause of its effect on numerical agreement. In round 32, it again treats attention and GEMM implementations as fixed and considers changes to the reduction order too risky. The search consequently concentrates on smaller changes that preserve the existing arithmetic. Together, these observations illustrate why the Harness needs an explicit quality criterion. Without one, the agent may either change optimizer precision without establishing training-quality parity, or continue to require exact numeri-cal agreement even during performance optimization. For-geTrain specifies the transition from Bit-for-Bit agreement to training-quality parity, giving the agent a criterion for evaluating changes to the reference computation. 

## 5 Related Work 

5.1 Large-Scale Training Frameworks 

ForgeTrain forges against a mature body of human-engineered training systems. Megatron-LM [16] popularized tensor and pipeline model parallelism for transformers; DeepSpeed’s ZeRO partitions optimizer states, gradients, and parameters across data-parallel ranks to fit trillion-parameter models [14]; GPipe introduced micro-batch pipeline parallelism with synchronous updates [7]; and Alpa automatically searches a hierarchical space of inter- and intra-operator parallel plans [21]. These are the canonical incumbents of the one-codebase paradigm: a single general framework whose abstraction layers and configuration knobs are built to cover every model, scale, and hardware topology. Even Alpa’s automation searches over a fixed framework’s plan space rather than regenerating the framework itself. ForgeTrain inverts this: instead of one framework amortized across all scenarios, it forges a per-scenario ForgeEngine from scratch. 

5.2 AI-Generated System Software 

The closest neighbors to ForgeTrain are whole-system soft-ware artifacts written end-to-end by AI. VibeTensor [18] is presented as the first fully AI-generated deep learning sys-tem, a PyTorch-style eager runtime assembled by agents. It is, however, released for agentic-systems research only: it runs 1 .7–6 .2× slower than PyTorch, and its authors describe a “Frankenstein composition effect” in which locally correct components compose into a globally suboptimal whole. The shortfall is not implementation skill but the absence of a truth source that forces global behavior to match a produc-tion baseline. Claude’s C Compiler [1] is methodologically the closest relative: roughly one hundred thousand lines of Rust writ-ten by sixteen cooperating agents, compiling the Linux 6.9 kernel, with GCC used as a differential-testing oracle. Pro-moting a reference implementation to a golden reference is precisely the discipline ForgeTrain formalizes in its Bit-for-Bit stage. Yet the compiler falls back to GCC for assembly and linking, is explicitly disclaimed as not production-ready, and targets the compiler domain rather than training infrastruc-ture. ForgeTrain differs on all three axes these systems leave open: it is whole-system, production-grade, and matches and surpasses its reference on the reference’s own benchmarks. 

5.3 AI-Generated Kernels and Operators 

A productive line of work forges performance-critical code at node granularity. AlphaEvolve [5] couples an evolutionary search loop with automated evaluation and has discovered scheduling heuristics and matrix-multiplication kernels de-ployed in production; KernelEvolve [10] evolves production-grade kernels under throughput targets; and Sakana’s CUDA Engineer [9] synthesizes thousands of test-verified CUDA 

> 11

Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu 

kernels. The combination of iterative or evolutionary search, test-driven verification, and profiling feedback used in these systems is precisely the Harness-driven loop, and these sys-tems show it is already production-ready at the level of a single kernel or operator. The distinction from ForgeTrain is granularity. Each of these efforts forges one self-contained node with a clear local objective, where correctness and speed can be measured in isolation. A training framework is an integrated system whose behavior is correct only globally, across an entire optimization trajectory. Forging at that granularity is what the match-then-surpass discipline of §3 makes possible, and it is the gap these node-level efforts leave open. 

## 6 Discussion and Conclusion 

Across seven model–hardware settings on two hardware ecosystems, every forged ForgeEngine surpasses its golden reference by 4 .7–33 .2% MFU at matched training quality. MiniCPM4 0.5B weights trained on a ForgeEngine match the Megatron-LM-trained baseline on downstream evaluation, and on Ascend a forged engine carried a 130M model through a complete stable–decay–SFT production run. ForgeTrain thus shows that a production-grade training framework can be forged end-to-end by an autonomous agent from an empty repository. To our knowledge, it is the first such framework forged by AI to match and surpass its human reference. ForgeTrain is thoroughly validated at smaller model scales, but forging for larger models remains to be demonstrated ex-perimentally, and the long-term maintenance and evolution of a forged engine are untested. ForgeTrain instantiates Forge Engineering: building dedi-cated systems software from scratch for each scenario and iteratively optimizing it toward peak performance under correctness and usability constraints. A reusable Harness carries construction knowledge and executable evaluations across scenarios, while each implementation is tailored to its workload, hardware, and operational requirements. As coding agents improve, Forge Engineering could make ded-icated systems a practical alternative to general-purpose implementations across a wider range of domains. 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. 2026. Claude’s C Compiler. Anthropic Engineering Blog. 

https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-c-compiler 

[2] Sharan Chetlur, Cliff Woolley, Philippe Vandermersch, Jonathan Co-hen, John Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan Shelhamer. 2014. cuDNN: Efficient Primitives for Deep Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.0759 

(2014). [3] Ben Cottier, Robi Rahman, Loredana Fattorini, Nestor Maslej, Tamay Besiroglu, and David Owen. 2024. The Rising Costs of Training Fron-tier AI Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21015 (2024). [4] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Vijay Bharadwaj, Jeff Holm, Raja Aluri, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and Brad Kenstler. 2025. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI Agents Solve Long-Horizon Software Engineering Tasks? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16941 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2509. 16941 

[5] Google DeepMind. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. Google DeepMind Blog. [6] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. 2019. A New Golden Age for Computer Architecture. Commun. ACM 62, 2 (2019), 76–85. [7] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Mia Xu Chen, Dehao Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. 2019. GPipe: Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks Using Pipeline Parallelism. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .[8] Huawei Ascend. [n. d.]. MindSpeed: An Acceleration Library for Large-Model Training on Ascend NPUs. https://gitee.com/ascend/ MindSpeed . Accessed 2026-09-09. [9] Robert Tjarko Lange, Aaditya Prasad, Qi Sun, Maxence Faldor, Yujin Tang, and David Ha. 2025. The AI CUDA Engineer: Agentic CUDA Kernel Discovery, Optimization & Composition. Sakana AI Technical Report. https://sakana.ai/ai-cuda-engineer/ 

[10] Gang Liao, Hongsen Qin, Ying Wang, Alicia Golden, Michael Kuchnik, Yavuz Yetim, Jia Jiunn Ang, Chunli Fu, Yihan He, Samuel Hsia, Zewei Jiang, Dianshi Li, Uladzimir Pashkevich, Varna Puvvada, Feng Shi, Matt Steiner, Ruichao Xiao, Liyuan Li, Nathan Yan, Xiayu Yu, Zhou Fang, Roman Levenstein, Kunming Ho, Haishan Zhu, Alec Hammond, Richard Li, Ajit Mathews, Kaustubh Gondkar, Abdul Zainul-Abedin, Ketan Singh, Hongtao Yu, Wenyuan Chi, Barney Huang, Sean Zhang, Noah Weller, Zach Marine, Wyatt Cook, Carole-Jean Wu, and Gaox-iang Liu. 2026. KernelEvolve: Scaling Agentic Kernel Coding for Heterogeneous AI Accelerators at Meta. In Proceedings of the 53rd ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) .

https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23236 

[11] NVIDIA. 2025. CUTLASS: CUDA Templates for Linear Algebra Sub-routines. GitHub repository. [12] NVIDIA. 2025. Transformer Engine. GitHub repository. [13] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chil-amkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-ing Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .[14] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. 2020. ZeRO: Memory Optimizations Toward Training Trillion Pa-rameter Models. In International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) .[15] Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri Dao. 2024. FlashAttention-3: Fast and Accurate Attention with Asynchrony and Low-precision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08608 (2024). [16] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 .[17] TechInsights. 2026. Analysis: Hyperscaler Earnings Takeaways Q1 2026 – The $700 Billion AI Arms Race. TechInsights Industry Analysis. https://www.techinsights.com/blog/analysis-hyperscaler-earnings-takeaways-q1-2026-700-billion-ai-arms-race 

[18] Bing Xu, Terry Chen, Fengzhe Zhou, Tianqi Chen, Yangqing Jia, Vinod Grover, Haicheng Wu, Wei Liu, Craig Wittenbrink, Wen mei Hwu, Roger Bringmann, Ming-Yu Liu, Luis Ceze, Michael Lightstone, and Humphrey Shi. 2026. VibeTensor: System Software for Deep Learning, Fully Generated by AI Agents. arXiv:2601.16238 [cs.SE] https://arxiv. org/abs/2601.16238 

12 ForgeTrain         

> [19] Justin Young. 2025. Effective Harnesses for Long-Running Agents. An-thropic Engineering Blog. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/ effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents
> [20] Ted Zadouri, Markus Hoehnerbach, Jay Shah, Timmy Liu, Vijay Thakkar, and Tri Dao. 2026. FlashAttention-4: Algorithm and Ker-nel Pipelining Co-Design for Asymmetric Hardware Scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.05451 (2026). [21] Lianmin Zheng, Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhifeng Chen, Yanping Huang, Yida Wang, Yuanzhong Xu, Danyang Zhuo, Eric P. Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2022. Alpa: Au-tomating Inter- and Intra-Operator Parallelism for Distributed Deep Learning. In USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) .

## A Framework-Level Optimization Trajectory 

Table 8 lists, in order of acceptance, the framework-level optimizations the agent loop applied to the MiniCPM4 0.5B ForgeEngine during Stage C, together with the measured MFU after each step (16 ×H100, DP only). This is the per-step detail behind the trajectory of Table 8: the first eight steps form the kernel-fusion regime, and the remainder the overlap/bucket/CUDA-graph regime. Two candidates (†) were measured but rejected by the Stage-C gate and reverted, so they do not carry into the final engine. 

## B Model Architectures 

The H100 evaluation scenarios use three released model families without architectural modification: MiniCPM4 0.5B and 8B 2, Qwen3 0.6B 3, and MiniCPM5 1B and 16B-A3B. All are decoder-only transformers with grouped-query atten-tion, SwiGLU feed-forward blocks, and pre-normalization RMSNorm; MiniCPM4 uses LongRoPE positional en-coding and the MiniCPM 𝜇 P-style scaling ( scale_emb ,

dim_model_base , scale_depth ), Qwen3 uses standard parameterization with RoPE ( 𝜃 =10 6) and per-head QK-Norm, and MiniCPM5 is a dense or sparse (MoE) model with RoPE and 𝜇 P scaling. Tables 9 and 10 give the configurations that fix the FLOP count and the shapes the forged operators target; the experiments train at a sequence length of 4096 (§4.1), within the context each architecture supports. 

## C Model-FLOPs Utilization 

We report MFU against an exact per-operator FLOP count rather than the usual closed-form 6 𝑁 𝐷 approximation, which omits attention and miscounts the GQA projections and the vocabulary head. We count a multiply–accumulate as two FLOPs and report per token; a quantity is the same for every token in the batch, so the per-step numerator is this total times the number of tokens processed. Let ℎ be the hidden size, 𝑓 the FFN intermediate size, 𝑛 ℎ and 𝑛 𝑘𝑣 the query and key/value head counts, 𝑑 the head dimension  

> 2https://www.modelscope.cn/models/OpenBMB/MiniCPM4-0.5B and
> https://www.modelscope.cn/models/OpenBMB/MiniCPM4-8B .
> 3https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B .

(ℎ𝑞 =𝑛 ℎ𝑑 , ℎ𝑘𝑣 =𝑛 𝑘𝑣 𝑑 ), 𝑉 the vocabulary size, 𝐿 the layer count, and 𝑠 the sequence length. The forward per-token FLOPs of each operator class are Attn. projections (Q,K,V,O) : 2 ℎ (ℎ𝑞 + 2ℎ𝑘𝑣 ) + 2ℎ𝑞 ℎ, 

FFN (gate, up, down; SwiGLU) : 2 (2ℎ𝑓 ) + 2𝑓 ℎ, 

Attention core ( 𝑄𝐾 ⊤, 𝐴𝑉 ; causal) : 2 𝑛 ℎ𝑠𝑑, 

Output / cross-entropy head : 2 ℎ𝑉 . 

The attention core carries a factor 12 for the causal mask (folded into the expression above), and grows with 𝑠 where the others do not. The backward pass costs twice the forward for every GEMM (one matrix for the data gradient, one for the weight gradient) and twice the forward for the attention core, so each per-layer term is multiplied by three (one forward, two backward) and summed over 𝐿 layers; the output head is counted once, also at the 1:2 forward-to-backward ratio. Table 11 evaluates this for the two evaluation scenarios. Two properties of this count matter for the operator bud-get of §4.2.2. First, the GEMMs and the attention core to-gether are the entire compute FLOP budget—normalization, RoPE, activations, and the optimizer contribute negligible FLOPs and are memory-bound, which is why they are ab-sent from this table yet still consume measurable time (the elementwise bucket of Table 3). Second, the attention core is the one term that scales with 𝑠 : at the 4096 sequence length it is 18 .8% of the 0.5B FLOP budget, and two-thirds of that is backward, which is why the attention backward is the single operator whose forging trajectory we trace in detail (Appendix D). 

## D Anatomy of a Forged Kernel 

The attention backward (§4.2.2) is the clearest illustration of how the loop forges a kernel, and its trajectory (Fig-ure 8) separates two kinds of decision. We optimize it on an H100 SXM at the engine’s attention shape ( 𝐵 =10, 𝐻 =16, 

𝑁 =4096, 𝐷 =64, FP16, GQA 8:1, causal), organized—following the FA-3/FA-4 design—as a three-kernel pipeline (prepro-cess → main → postprocess). From a naive baseline that accumulates d 𝑄 through atomicAdd (5 .19 ms, 16 .5% MFU), the loop first lays a structural foundation: a 128-row 𝑀 -tile (versus 64), warp specialization into one producer and two consumer warp-groups (384 threads, a 24 /240-register split), double-buffering on every pipeline stage, and an asynchro-nous five-GEMM issue schedule. These choices are mutually dependent and do not pay off in isolation—while they are be-ing put in place latency regresses to 6 .3–6 .9 ms, because the d𝑄 -accumulator data-flow is still the bottleneck. The deci-sive step is a data-layout refactor that replaces the WGMMA-fragment-aware d 𝑄 accumulator with a flat global buffer and a flat thread-value register-to-shared copy, and sources the d𝐾 /d𝑉 GEMM operands directly from registers; this cuts shared-memory bank conflicts from 73 M to 8 .2 M and brings 

> 13 Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

Table 8. Framework-level optimizations applied to MiniCPM4 0.5B during Stage C, in acceptance order. MFU is measured on 16 ×H100 (data-parallel). † marks candidates that were reverted after the gate rejected them. 

# Phase Optimization MFU (%) 

1 Kernel fusion Stage-B baseline (no fusion) 30.45 2 Kernel fusion Fused cross-entropy + SwiGLU 31.64 3 Kernel fusion Cross-entropy NaN + embedding-backward fix 34.73 4 Kernel fusion Direct Transformer-Engine attention 34.76 5 Kernel fusion Fused residual-add + RMSNorm 35.24 6 Kernel fusion Fused gradient-clip + Adam + param-sync 35.24 7 Kernel fusion as_strided cross-entropy + FFN fusion 37.23 8 Kernel fusion Cross-entropy prefill + fused RMSNorm backward 37.81 9 Overlap/graph Gradient bucketing (100 MB) 38.55 10 Overlap/graph Per-bucket all-gather + optimizer overlap 38.55 11 Overlap/graph All-gather–optimizer overlap 38.55 12 Overlap/graph Wgrad-overlap by default 38.55 13 Overlap/graph NCCL tuning + async loss all-reduce 38.16 14 Overlap/graph Production-default verification 38.57 15 Overlap/graph Batch-flush write-grad restructure 38.57 16 Overlap/graph Batch-flush gate 38.57 17 Overlap/graph ZeRO-1 sharded optimizer 39.70 18 Overlap/graph Sharded optimizer by default 39.40 19 Overlap/graph Routing / baseline fixes 39.40 20 Overlap/graph Fused norm-backward + multi-tensor Adam 39.52 21 Overlap/graph Fused-operator micro-optimizations 39.15 22 Overlap/graph RoPE strided-K (drop K copy) 39.30 23 Overlap/graph Document-aware fused RoPE 41.00 24 Overlap/graph Wgrad bucket 200 MB 41.22 25 Overlap/graph RoPE backward in-place † 41.34 26 Overlap/graph Forward-only CUDA Graph 40.99 27 Overlap/graph Full-step CUDA Graph (phase A) 41.37 28 Overlap/graph Full-step CUDA Graph (phase B/C) 41.37 29 Overlap/graph Wgrad bucket 400 MB (single bucket) 41.66 30 Overlap/graph Cross-step pipelining † 41.66 

(a) Qwen3 0.6B (b) MiniCPM4 0.5B (c) MiniCPM5 1B (d) MiniCPM5 16B A3B (e) MiniCPM4 8B 

Figure 7. Per-setting MFU trajectories of the five H100 settings from Table 2, each normalized to its own Megatron-LM baseline (dashed). The x-axis is the setting’s 𝑘 -th recorded forging round. the kernel to 2 .22 ms (38 .6% MFU). Three independent tac-tical optimizations then close the gap: 128-bit vectorized preprocess/postprocess copies (2 .03 ms), skipping the causal mask on all but the diagonal block—which halves arithmetic-pipe instructions ( −54%)—(1 .97 ms), and removing a stray 

cudaStreamSynchronize that had disabled programmatic dependent launch, restoring cross-kernel overlap (1 .90 ms, 45 .7% MFU). The result is 5 .6% faster than FlashAttention-4 (2 .007 ms, 43 .3% MFU) and 31% faster than cuDNN (2 .483 ms, 35 .0% MFU); note that the margin over FA-4 runs the other way in the per-kernel NCU timings, which are slower than FA-4’s (2072 versus 1990 μs). The entire end-to-end margin therefore comes from cross-kernel launch overlap: program-matic dependent launch hides 0 .17 ms across our four kernels, against no measurable overlap for FA-4’s five. The method-ological point generalizes beyond this one kernel: structural decisions must be fixed jointly and up front, even through a 

> 14 ForgeTrain

Table 9. MiniCPM4 architecture configuration for the two evaluation scenarios. 𝑎 

Hyperparameter MiniCPM4 0.5B MiniCPM4 8B 

Transformer layers 24 32 Hidden size 1024 4096 FFN intermediate size 4096 16384 Attention heads 16 32 Key/value heads (GQA) 2 2Head dimension 64 128 Vocabulary size 73448 73448 Activation SwiGLU (SiLU) SwiGLU (SiLU) Normalization RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −5) RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −6)Position encoding LongRoPE LongRoPE Max context length 32768 32768 Tied input/output embeddings Yes No 

𝜇 P ( scale_emb , dim_model_base , scale_depth ) 12 , 256 , 1.4 12 , 256 , 1.4MTP / Eagle head On (1 layer) Off Training precision bfloat16 bfloat16  

> 𝑎

The 0.5B column carries a one-layer MTP (Eagle) head. The framework-level setting of Section 4.2.1 forges it, whereas the operator-level forge of Section 4.2.2 and the correctness experiment of Section 4.3 run the same model with this head disabled (no-MTP). The 8B column trains without MTP. 

Table 10. H100 architecture configurations for the Qwen3 and MiniCPM5 scenarios. MiniCPM5 16B-A3B is a sparse MoE model (160 routed experts, top-16, plus a 512-wide shared expert); its dense FFN width applies to layer 0 only, and layers 1–27 use moe_ffn_hidden_size instead. 

Hyperparameter Qwen3 0.6B MiniCPM5 1B MiniCPM5 16B-A3B 

Transformer layers 28 24 28 Hidden size 1024 1536 2048 FFN intermediate size 3072 4608 8192 MoE FFN size (routed experts) — — 512 Routed experts (top-𝑘 ) — — 160 (16) Attention heads 16 16 32 Key/value heads (GQA) 8 2 2Head dimension 128 128 128 Vocabulary size 151936 130560 130560 Activation SwiGLU (SiLU) SwiGLU (SiLU) SwiGLU (SiLU) Normalization RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −6) RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −6) RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −6)Position encoding RoPE ( 𝜃 =10 6, QK-Norm) RoPE RoPE Tied input/output embeddings Yes No No 

𝜇 P ( scale_emb , dim_model_base , scale_depth ) — 12 , 256 , 1.4 12 , 256 , 1.4MTP / Eagle head Off On (1 layer) Off Training precision bfloat16 bfloat16 bfloat16 

transient regression, whereas tactical optimizations compose independently on top of a correct structure. 

## E Optimization Catalog 

This appendix details the optimizations summarized in §4.2.1 and §4.2.2. 

Framework level, second class (goals the reference shares, boundaries redrawn on measured returns). 

• Whole-forward graph capture. The roughly three hun-dred kernel launches from the embedding to the output projection are captured into a single CUDA graph replayed once per step, with the backward pass, communication, and the optimizer left outside. Megatron-LM offers a wider graph spectrum—per-layer graphs, a full-iteration graph that includes gradient reduction, and a separately graphed optimizer step; the agent’s narrower boundary is an ad-judicated outcome: the wider candidates (forward-plus-backward graphs, collectives and optimizer in-graph) were each tried in earnest and rejected by the gate for negative measured returns or an unsupporting runtime stack. 

> 15 Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

Table 11. Per-token FLOP budget (forward +backward) by operator class for the two MiniCPM4 scenarios at sequence length 4096, with each class’s share of the per-step total. The total is the numerator of the MFU computed in §4.1.                          

> 0.5B 8B Operator class GFLOP/tok Share GFLOP/tok Share
> FFN GEMM (gate/up/down) 1.812 56 .5% 38 .655 76 .5% Attention core (FlashAttention) 0.604 18 .8% 3.221 6.4% Output / CE GEMM 0.451 14 .1% 1.805 3.6% Attn. projection GEMM (Q/K/V/O) 0.340 10 .6% 6.845 13 .5%
> Total 3.207 100% 50 .526 100%

• Fused optimizer step. Gradient clipping, the AdamW update, and the master-to-bf16 write-back are fused into a single kernel ( fused_clip_adam_sync ), where Megatron-LM keeps the three as separate steps. 

• Optimizer–gather pipeline. On the 8B engine, the pa-rameter all-gather is interleaved with the optimizer step bucket by bucket: the moment a bucket’s Adam update completes, the all-gather of its BF16 parameters is issued on the communication stream, ordered by forward con-sumption so it overlaps the next step’s forward, which waits only at bucket boundaries on the matching events. Megatron-LM’s overlap_param_gather likewise over-laps the all-gather with the next forward, but dispatches it lazily, bucket by bucket, from forward pre-hooks; the agent moved the dispatch into the optimizer step itself, interleaved with per-bucket Adam as a single pipeline. 

Framework level, third class (no Megatron-LM coun-terpart). 

• Asynchronous loss all-reduce. The scalar loss all-reduce is issued on the communication stream and overlapped with the optimizer step, hiding it entirely in measurement; Megatron-LM leaves this reduction synchronously on the critical path. 

• Device-side gradient norm and clipping. The gradient norm, clip coefficient, and scaling are computed entirely on device—l2norm, all-reduce, square root, clamp, and scale in one uninterrupted pipeline—where Megatron-LM reads the norm back to the host ( .item() ) between norm and clip, placing a CPU–GPU synchronization on the hot path. 

• Zero-copy gradient views. Having established that its fused Adam kernel only reads gradients, the agent had the all-gather return views rather than copies, eliminating roughly one hundred and fifty clones and about 2 GB of peak memory per step. 

• Per-shape operator selection. A dispatcher bench-marks candidate implementations across CuTeDSL, cuBLAS, Triton, and Transformer Engine and selects, per operator shape, the kernel of highest model-FLOPs utilization (MFU); Megatron-LM relies on a fixed backend with a small set of flags and performs no such automatic selection. 

• High-priority auxiliary streams. The streams carrying wgrad and gradient reduction are set to high CUDA pri-ority, letting them land ahead of the main stream’s large GEMMs at SM scheduling boundaries and shortening the exposed communication and wgrad tail at the end of each step; Megatron-LM runs all its streams at default priority. 

Kernel level, the four recurring families. 

• Warp specialization and software pipelining. Threads within a block are split into producer roles that move data and consumer roles that compute, with every pipeline stage multiply-buffered and the constituent matrix multi-plies issued asynchronously, so memory movement and computation overlap across stages rather than serializing. A general-purpose library fixes one thread-to-work map-ping for a whole shape class; forging it for the engine’s exact dimensions recovers the occupancy that mapping leaves on the table. 

• Memory-layout specialization. On-chip data is laid out for the operator’s exact shape—flattening accumulator buffers to remove shared-memory bank conflicts, vector-izing the load/store paths, and sourcing matrix-multiply operands directly from registers rather than staging them through shared memory. These are the layout choices a vendor kernel cannot hard-code without knowing the shape, and they convert otherwise-stalled memory pipes into useful throughput. 

• Backward-pass fusion. An operator’s backward is com-puted by two matrix multiplies—one for the data gradient, one for the weight gradient—and, under sharding, a gradi-ent reduction; the agent folds all three into a single kernel, sparing the launch overhead and intermediate write-back that a vendor library’s separate dgrad , wgrad , and reduce kernels pay. 

• Cross-kernel scheduling. Adjacent kernels are over-lapped across their launch boundary through program-matic dependent launch, and computation that the prob-lem structure renders redundant is pruned outright (for 

> 16 ForgeTrain

Figure 8. Optimization trajectory of the FlashAttention backward kernel ( 𝐵 =10, 𝐻 =16, 𝑁 =4096, 𝐷 =64, FP16, GQA 8:1, causal; H100 SXM). Top: backward latency (lower is better) across milestones. A structural build-up phase (warp-specialized three-kernel pipeline, 128-row 𝑀 -tile, double-buffered stages) is mutually dependent and regresses latency to 6 .3–6 .9 ms before a d 𝑄 data-layout refactor (flat global buffer, register-to-shared copy, register-sourced GEMM operands) drops the kernel to 2.22 ms; three independent tactical steps—128-bit vectorized preprocess/postprocess copies, diagonal-only causal masking, and removing a stray synchronization that had disabled programmatic dependent launch—then reach 1 .90 ms (45 .7% MFU). 

Middle: the four tactical steps magnified from the dashed region of the top panel, on a 1 .8–3 .1 ms scale, against the cuDNN and FlashAttention-4 end-to-end reference lines; the gains are individually small (2 .22 → 2.03 → 1.97 → 1.90 ms) and are what the top panel cannot resolve. Bottom left: per-kernel NCU time breakdown versus FlashAttention-4 (forged sum 2072 μs vs. 1990); our per-kernel times are the slower ones, and the two post-d 𝐾 kernels of FA-4 appear fused at 0 .024 ms in ours. Bottom right: 

end-to-end backward latency—against FlashAttention-4 (2 .007 ms, 43 .3% MFU) the forged kernel is 5 .6% faster and against cuDNN (2 .483 ms, 35 .0% MFU) 31% faster, despite the slower per-kernel sum: the entire margin comes from programmatic dependent launch hiding 0 .17 ms across our four kernels, where FA-4’s five show no measurable overlap. a causal operator, evaluating the mask only on the diago-nal block). Both recover time that lives between or inside kernels, where a single-kernel benchmark cannot reach. 

## F Why the Engine Is Faster, Mechanism by Mechanism 

§4.2.3 traces the forged 0.5B engine’s margin over Megatron-LM 0.15 to three sources. This appendix expands each source with its source location and key code. Citations are file:line into the exported ForgeEngine package; snippets are trimmed of unrelated lines only. 

> 17 Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

Reproduced standard set. The optimizations Megatron-LM already has, reproduced component for component with the same boundaries ( nccl.py:152,654 — bucketed reduce-scatter overlapped with backward; optimizer.py:668 —ZeRO-1 sharding; triton_kernels.py:362,699 — fused RMSNorm, :208,268 — SwiGLU, :1005,1166 — RoPE, :112 

— fused cross-entropy; and the direct Transformer-Engine attention path). These were rediscovered in the first nine steps of Table 8. 

Vertical integration. Components Megatron keeps as separate stages, merged into one execution path. The op-timizer tail is the clearest case: Megatron runs gradient clipping, the Adam update, and the master-to-bf16 write-back as three passes over every parameter; the engine fuses all three into one Triton kernel ( optimizer.py:357-385 ,

triton_kernels.py:415-446 ).    

> # optimizer.py:357 -- one fused_clip_adam_sync does clip + Adam + cast. def fused_clip_adam_sync(state, fp32_grads, params, lr, clip_coeff): state.step_count += 1 for name in state.param_names: g = fp32_grads[name].float() fused_adam_sync(g, master, exp_avg, exp_avg_sq, bf16_param, lr=param_lr, step=state.step_count, clip_coeff=clip_coeff, wd=wd) # triton_kernels.py:415 -- one pass per element: clip, Adam, cast. g= tl.load(grad_ptr+offs) * clip_coeff m= beta1*m + (1-beta1)*g v= beta2*v + (1-beta2)*g*g m_hat = m / bias_correction1 v_hat = v / bias_correction2 update = m_hat / (tl.sqrt(v_hat) + eps) + wd * p p_new = p - lr * update tl.store(master_ptr+offs, p_new) tl.store(bf16_ptr+offs, p_new.to(tl.bfloat16))

The same source also merges the per-layer graphs Megatron builds into one captured CUDA graph over a whole microbatch’s forward, loss, and backward (step_graph.py:235-260 ). 

Deep customization. Points with no Megatron counter-part, where the engine rewrites the execution path around the fixed model, shapes, and parallel layout. The optimizer scalars and clipping coefficient are the cornerstone: instead of computing the clip coefficient on the host from a gradient-norm .item() round trip and passing the resulting Python floats as kernel arguments (which would then be frozen at capture), they stay on the device, in 1-element FP32 buffers the kernel reads via tl.load (optimizer.py:420-457 ,

optimizer.py:460-524 , triton_kernels.py:525-566 ).    

> # optimizer.py:420 -- clip coefficient computed entirely on device. def compute_clip_coeff_device(grad_norm_sq, clip_coeff_buf, max_norm, eps): grad_norm = grad_norm_sq.view(()).clamp(min=0.0).sqrt() coeff = (max_norm / (grad_norm + eps)).clamp(max=1.0) clip_coeff_buf.view(()).copy_(coeff) return clip_coeff_buf # triton_kernels.py:544 -- kernel reads per-step scalars from buffers. lr = tl.load(lr_ptr).to(tl.float32) clip = tl.load(clip_coeff_ptr).to(tl.float32) bc1 = tl.load(bc1_ptr).to(tl.float32) bc2 = tl.load(bc2_ptr).to(tl.float32)

Because the values live in buffers rather than frozen launch arguments, the host refreshes them once per step (optimizer.py:492-524 ) and the replay stays correct; keeping the scalars on the device is what lets the step avoid synchronizing with the host. The remaining deep-customization points — the loss all-reduce moved off the critical path, and the read-only, layout-specific paths specialized to the fixed shapes — complete the set. 

## G Ascend Framework-Level Optimization Trajectory 

Table 12 lists, in acceptance order, the gated optimization rounds behind Table 2 for the MiniCPM5 130M engine, to-gether with each round’s own reported avg MFU (standard )

over its gate window. This is the per-round detail behind that trajectory, analogous to Table 8 on H100. Unlike the H100 trajectory, which is governed by a single MFU target throughout, the Ascend log applies two gates in sequence — perf-bitwise ( ≥ 13%) then long-horizon ( ≥ 25%) — so the phase column marks which gate each round is scored against. 

## H Ascend Model Architectures 

Table 14 lists the geometry for the two Ascend scenarios referenced throughout this section, analogous to Table 9 on H100. The 130M geometry (18 layers, minicpm5_130m )is the one the recorded forging rounds and the bit-for-bit anchors of Table 13 were measured on, chosen for cheaper iteration; the 1B geometry (24 layers) is the engine pretrained end-to-end in §4.3.1. Two points are worth flagging rather than smoothing over. First, the 1B scenario’s FLOP accounting (Appendix I) uses the full MiniCPM5 tokenizer vocabulary (130560) because that is the field config.py ’s _global_flops_per_token 

reads, whereas the 130M scenario pads to 73448 to match the pre-tokenized data shards it trains against — a real differ-ence in what the two model families’ embedding/LM-head matrices are sized to, not a reporting inconsistency. Second, the 1B config carries a one-layer Eagle (MTP) head that the 130M scenario does not; its forward-plus-backward FLOPs 

> 18 ForgeTrain

Table 12. Gated optimization rounds applied to the MiniCPM5 130M engine (18 layers), in acceptance order. MFU is that round’s own avg MFU (standard ) over its gate window (Ascend 910, DP-only).                                                  

> #Gate Optimization MFU (%)
> 1perf-bitwise ( ≥13%) Baseline (bitwise-preserving) 9.67 2perf-bitwise ( ≥13%) Mask/RoPE cache + foreach grad ops 9.73 3perf-bitwise ( ≥13%) Async grad-hash overlap 15.27 4long-horizon ( ≥25%) det-off + chunked CE (memory) 19.21 5long-horizon ( ≥25%) Dataloader prefetch 20.10 6long-horizon ( ≥25%) CE upcast fused into log-softmax 20.05 7long-horizon ( ≥25%) Reuse forward log-softmax in backward 21.87 8long-horizon ( ≥25%) Phase-breakdown + host-sync lift 22.04 9long-horizon ( ≥25%) foreach-batched AdamW 22.08 10 long-horizon ( ≥25%) Fused NPU cross-entropy (FP32) 24.87 11 long-horizon ( ≥25%) Defer grad-norm .item() off hot path 24.88

Table 13. Bit-for-bit anchor counts captured from the golden reference. All listed tensors must match exactly; MiniCPM5 130M uses blake2b equality.             

> Scenario Forward Backward Total
> MiniCPM4 0.5B 183 339 522 MiniCPM4 8B 164 195 359 MiniCPM5 130M (Ascend) 128 237 365

are the last row of Appendix I’s table, bringing the 1B to-tal to 7 .940 GFLOP/tok, while the 130M total stays at the backbone-only 1 .070. 

## I Ascend Model-FLOPs Utilization 

The Ascend engines report MFU against the same exact per-operator FLOP count as §C, not the closed-form approxima-tion: both engines compute the sum of attention projections, FFN (SwiGLU), attention core, and output head per layer, for-ward, then multiply the total by 3 for forward-plus-backward — the identical accounting §C uses, down to the same 1:2 forward-backward ratio applied to the output head. The 1B engine adds the forward FLOPs of its one-layer Eagle (MTP) head to this sum when MTP_ENABLED is set, and we include that head as a separate row in Table 15; the 130M engine has no such head, so its total is backbone-only. We repro-duce the count here (Table 15) rather than take the engines’ self-reported denominators on faith: applying the formula to the 0.5B/24-layer H100 geometry first reproduces Table 11’s 3.207 GFLOP/tok exactly, which is what justifies applying the same formula to the Ascend geometries of Table 14. The attention core is a noticeably larger share on the Ascend 130M scenario (26 .5%) than on the H100 0.5B sce-nario (18 .8%, Table 11): the 130M model runs the same 4096 sequence length as H100 but with fewer, narrower heads (10 × 64 versus 16 × 64), so the FFN does not dominate the budget as heavily. On the 1B scenario the attention share is lower still (15 .2%), because the one-layer Eagle (MTP) head – which repeats the backbone layer’s attention, projection, and FFN plus a second output head – absorbs 18 .3% of the budget and dilutes the backbone shares. This is the reason the fused-CE win of §4.2.1 (which sits inside the output-head and attention-adjacent work) moves MFU by a larger fraction on the 130M geometry than an equivalent fusion would on the H100 0.5B geometry. Confirming that this nu-merator matches §C’s methodology narrows — but does not close — the denominator question: what remains unverified is whether MindSpeed’s own –log-throughput uses the same per-operator count on its side of Table 2, or a coarser approximation. 

## J Ascend Optimization Catalog 

This appendix supplements §4.2.1 with additional opti-mizations recorded in the exported source but not detailed in the main text, in the same two-tier shape as Appen-dix E. Citations are file:line references into the exported 

training_engine_tensor packages. 

Framework level (goals MindSpeed shares, structure redrawn on Ascend). 

• No autograd engine. Both engines run their entire step under torch.no_grad() with a hand-written static back-ward that replays the reference’s own primitive backward ops in a fixed, pre-determined order ( backward.py:1-41 ). MindSpeed’s Megatron core builds and walks an autograd graph every step; the forged engines skip that construc-tion and traversal entirely, at the cost of hand-maintaining the backward op sequence themselves. 

• Host-sync removal on the optimizer path. The 130M engine lifts the optimizer step counter into a host Python int ( train_loop.py:896-904 ) and defers the grad-norm .item() call past the step-end device sync (optimizer.py:207-240 ), removing two CPU–GPU synchronization points from the hot path — the same class 

> 19 Qingfeng He, Zhui Zhu, Shangzhan Li, Yaojian Chen, Haojun Sun, Xu Chen, Leshan Li, Yifei Shen, Changjingxing Zhao, Mengyuan Fan, Wenyu Guan, Yiyun Zheng, Yuxuan Zuo, Zhen Li, Zhenghang Luo, Yuxuan Li, Xu Han, and Zhiyuan Liu

Table 14. MiniCPM5 architecture configuration for the two Ascend scenarios.                                     

> Hyperparameter 130M 1B (production)
> Transformer layers 18 24 Hidden size 640 1536 FFN intermediate size 1920 4608 Attention heads 10 16 Key/value heads (GQA) 22Head dimension 64 128 Vocabulary size (as used in FLOPs) 73448 130560 Activation SwiGLU SwiGLU Normalization RMSNorm ( 𝜖 =10 −6)RMSNorm Position encoding RoPE (base 10000) RoPE Sequence length 4096 4096 Tied input/output embeddings Yes —
> 𝜇 P (emb/depth/base-hidden) 12 .0,1.4,256 12 .0,1.4,256 MTP / Eagle head Off On (1 layer) Training precision bfloat16 bfloat16

Table 15. Per-token FLOP budget (forward +backward) by operator class for the two Ascend scenarios at sequence length 4096, computed with the §C formula. The 1B total includes its one-layer Eagle (MTP) head, shown as its own row; the 130M scenario trains without MTP, so that row is not applicable there.                              

> 130M 1B (production) Operator class GFLOP/tok Share GFLOP/tok Share
> FFN GEMM (gate/up/down) 0.398 37 .2% 3.058 38 .5% Attention core 0.283 26 .5% 1.208 15 .2% Output / CE head 0.282 26 .4% 1.203 15 .2% Attn. projection GEMM (Q/K/V/O) 0.106 9.9% 1.019 12 .8% Eagle / MTP head ——1.452 18 .3%
> Total 1.070 100% 7.940 100%

of fix as H100’s “device-side gradient norm and clipping” catalog item (Appendix E), independently rediscovered on Ascend. 

• Chunked / streaming cross-entropy. Beyond the fused FP32 CE operator described in §4.2.1, the 1B engine carries a streaming CE path that folds the LM-head GEMM, the CE, and both gradient passes into one chunked loop that never materializes the full logits tensor at all — not even a row-chunk at a time ( backward.py:276-368 ). It is im-plemented and correctness-tested but not enabled in pro-duction ( train_loop.py:1279 , _streaming_ce=False ); the in-place chunked path actually running in production (§4.2.1) is the more conservative of the two. 

Framework level (no MindSpeed counterpart). 

• Weights as all-gather-buffer views. The 1B engine’s 

bf16 parameter buffers are not copied out of the all-gather receive buffer after each collective; the weights are views into it, replaced in place on the next sync (optimizer.py:1521-1552 ), sparing roughly 1 .8 GiB of duplicate bf16 weight storage. This is the same zero-copy principle as H100’s “zero-copy gradient views” catalog item (Appendix E), applied on the parameter side instead of the gradient side. 

• Batched Newton–Schulz for Muon. The 1B optimizer’s Muon branch stacks same-shaped 2D parameters and runs Newton–Schulz iteration as batched bmm calls instead of one launch per parameter, cutting roughly 2500 kernel launches to 60 ( optimizer.py:93-118 ) — an optimizer-level fusion with no Megatron-LM-side analog in §4.2.2, since the H100 engine does not run Muon. 

Kernel level (1B custom AscendC GEMM family; structural evidence only — see the header note on why no benchmark table is given here). 

• Per-shape specialized tiling. Fifteen AscendC GEMM kernels (five projections × three directions: forward, 

dgrad , dwgrad ) hard-code 𝑀 /𝐾 /𝑁 as compile-time constants and tile dimensions sized to fill the 910’s L1/L0C capacity exactly (custom_gemm.py:59-91 ;e.g. fc2_fwd_entry.cpp:16-33 fixes AIC_CNT=20 ,

baseM=128 , shareL1Size= 516096 ), the same per-shape   

> 20 ForgeTrain
> (a) MiniCPM5 1B
> (b) MiniCPM5 130M

Figure 9. Per-setting MFU trajectories of the two Ascend 910 settings from Table 2, each normalized to its own MindSpeed baseline (dashed). The x-axis is the setting’s 𝑘 -th recorded forging round. specialization principle as H100’s kernel-level catalog (Appendix E), retargeted to a different vendor ISA. 

• Transpose elimination via isTrans . The weight and gradient-output tensors are consumed in their natural physical layout rather than materialized-transposed first ( fc2_fwd_entry.cpp:81,114 ), sparing a full-tensor HBM round-trip the vendor GEMM path would otherwise pay on the weight gradient. 

• Direct dispatch, bypassing the operator registry. The custom kernels are invoked via ctypes against a compiled 

.so , passing raw data_ptr() s and the current stream directly ( custom_gemm.py:247-263,359-363 ), skipping the aten dispatcher, TensorIterator , and the torch_npu aclnn wrapper layer entirely.