Title: COMPASS-ABS: Reducing Fragmentation in Shared GPU Clusters for Deep Learning Training Workloads

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.18519v1

Published Time: Thu, 17 Sep 2026 01:21:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# COMPASS-ABS: Reducing Fragmentation in Shared GPU Clusters for Deep Learning Training Workloads 

## Yukai Zhou Hongfan Wu ∗

## Abstract 

With the rapid advancement of deep learning technology, shared GPU clusters receive an increasing number of deep learning training (DLT) jobs. Yet resource fragmentation make such clusters underutilized and forces the DLT jobs running on them to endure long turnaround times. Exten-sive research has been devoted to quantifying fragmenta-tion and developing scheduling algorithms that alleviate its impact. However, existing fragmentation measures break down in the absence of workload distribution information, while current schedulers cannot continuously maintain re-source fragmentation at a low level. To tackle these prob-lems, we first introduce Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation (SIF), a metric built on the notion of partial-nodes that is independent of historical workload knowledge. We then pro-pose COMPASS-ABS, which employs the COMPact-ASSured (COMPASS) algorithm to confine the cluster state within a tight Anchor-Based Space (ABS), whose construction fully leverages the topological alignment between dominant work-load size and node capacity. Moreover. We also prove that it ensures SIF is bounded by 2 

> 𝑁

under a workload composition condition that matches both theory and production. Evalu-ations implemented on a physical cluster and a simulated cluster demonstrate COMPASS-ABS effectiveness at improv-ing resource utilization, reducing DLT job completion time by reducing fragmentation. 

CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →

Cloud computing ; • Theory of computation → Scheduling algorithms .

Keywords: Deep learning training, shared GPU cluster, frag-mentation, resource scheduling 

## 1 Introduction 

Deep learning has developed rapidly in recent years, driven by larger model frameworks, more complex training pipelines, and the rise of large language models[23, 34]. Training these models requires substantial GPU resources, so industrial labs and cloud providers operate large shared GPU clusters where users submit deep learning training (DLT) jobs[15, 22, 36, 44]. Yet production clusters exhibit both low GPU cluster utilization and long turnaround time for DLT jobs, which stems from the resource fragmentation rather the capacity shortage[24, 45]. 

> ∗Corresponding author.

Resource fragmentation arises from DLT job place-ment constraints. A DLT job consists of multiple homo-geneous instances, and the GPUs assigned to each instance need to lie within a single node to preserve fast intra-instance communication[4, 10]. This intra-node constraint can pre-vent admission even when the cluster has enough available GPUs in total. Consider a cluster with three nodes that cur-rently have 3, 5, and 2 free GPUs, i.e. 10 free GPUs in total. A job with two 4-GPU instances demanding 8 GPUs in total cannot be admitted because only one node can host a 4-GPU instance. The fragmented distribution of idle GPUs blocks a placement that would appear feasible under an aggregate-capacity view. So resource fragmentation leads to low GPU utilization despite pending jobs awaiting processing, causing prolonged job completion time due to long queueing latency. This observation raises two central questions: (1) how to quantify the resource fragmentation? (2) how to solve the problem of GPU cluster underutilization and long completion time of DLT jobs caused by resource fragmentation? Exist-ing fragmentation metrics are statistical measures of frag-mentation. FGD[45] defines a workload-distribution-aware fragmentation score, while CAFGD[24] refines this idea by weighting long-term and short-term distributions. These metrics rely on workload history knowledge and fail to mea-sure fragmentation in its absence. Existing schedulers for scheduling DLT jobs in shared GPU clusters can be grouped into two categories. Non-migration methods place each job at admission and never revisit the decision : ElasticFlow[9] formulates place-ment as a bin-packing problem and applies best-fit-style heuristics, while FGD[45] and CAFGD[24] greedily opti-mize their fragmentation metrics at first admission time. These methods react only to the current state and provide no mechanism to repair fragmentation that has existed. 

Migration-based approaches reorganize running DLT jobs through checkpoint-based migration . Gandiva[50] only suggests migrating running jobs when cluster status changes, without specifying the implementation details like when and how to migrate. FFT[30] and DRR[49] adopt a round-driven strategy whose defragmentation relies on global migration at the beginning of each round, which cannot mit-igate the resource fragmentation accumulated within each round. More fundamentally, they all cannot guarantee low fragmentation throughout the online scheduling process. Motivated by these limitations, we introduce Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation (SIF) to measure dynamic resource 

> 1arXiv:2609.18519v1 [cs.DC] 16 Sep 2026 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

fragmentation and design the COMPASS-ABS scheduler 

for DLT jobs in shared GPU clusters. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation (SIF). Build-ing on the notion of partial-nodes, we decompose observed fragmentation into two parts: an inherent component forced by the intra-node placement con-straint, and an additional component caused by the scheduler’s placement decisions. SIF measures only the latter, which no longer requires the workload his-tory distribution information. 

• COMPASS-ABS scheduler. We firstly define ABS 

(Anchor-Based Space), a constrained feasible cluster state domain whose structure is tailored jointly to the dominance of power-of-two GPU demands and to their topology alignment with node capacity. Multi-GPU instances are placed as anchors in slots of width 2, 4, or 8 GPUs, while 1-GPU instances are managed through a pool and used as fillers for saturating slot vacancies. The COMPASS (COMPact-ASSured) algo-rithm maintains cluster change within this space in a compact manner through three operators: Place ,

Remove , and Compact . Under the Workload Composi-tion Condition (WCC) stated in Theorem 1, COMPASS-ABS guarantees SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2 

> 𝑁

at all times. 

• Evaluation. We conduct comprehensive experiments to validate the scheduling performance of COMPASS-ABS, including large-scale simulations on two produc-tion traces and a physical-cluster deployment with a synthetic DLT workload. COMPASS-ABS attains the highest GPU utilization and the shortest job comple-tion time among all state-of-the-art baselines by main-taining the lowest fragmentation level, and sustains its strength under varying cluster load, workload com-position, and migration cost, even when the Workload Composition Condition is violated. 

## 2 Background 

This section reviews the task structure and communication patterns of DLT jobs, together with the architectural prop-erties of physical GPU clusters. We point out two system characteristics that motivate the scheduler design in Sec-tion 4: the per-instance GPU demand 𝑔 𝑖 is concentrated on power-of-two values, and the basic communication domain in production clusters is a node of 8 GPUs. 

2.1 Deep Learning Training Jobs 

As deep learning models continue to extend, the memory capacity and compute throughput of a single GPU are insuf-ficient for an increasing fraction of training workloads. Mod-ern frameworks therefore support training across multiple GPUs[17, 28, 34]. The growth of training datasets drives the use of data parallelism, where the training program is repli-cated across multiple instances processing different mini-batches. Thus, a DLT job is composed of multiple homoge-neous instances that run the same model and carry the same per-instance GPU demand 𝑔 𝑖 [4]. Within each instance, multiple GPUs may collaborate through tensor parallelism and other mechanisms to exe-cute the forward and backward passes[25, 32, 34]. These mechanisms frequently invoke collective communication primitives such as All-Reduce, making the instance sensi-tive to communication latency[19]. Tensor parallelism parti-tions large parameter matrices across GPUs, and common tensor-parallel degrees are 2, 4, and 8. Collective implemen-tations such as ring, recursive-doubling, and tree-based All-Reduce are structurally defined on power-of-two partici-pant counts, while non-power-of-two configurations lead to padding or special-case handling[41]. These properties make 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8} a natural operating regime, which is consistent with production trace characteristics[15, 22, 44]. Beyond intra-instance communication, different instances of the same job execute data-parallel synchronization at the end of each iteration to apply a synchronous parameter update, which requires all instances to run concurrently. Thus, schedulers for DLT workloads commonly treat each job as an all-or-nothing allocation unit, which imposes a gang scheduling requirement[10, 51]. 

2.2 Physical Cluster 

Modern GPU clusters comprise multiple nodes, each of which serves as a primary high-bandwidth communication domain in the network topology[23, 36]. GPUs on the same node communicate through NVLink at terabyte-per-second band-width, whereas inter-node communication involves lower bandwidth and switch-level congestion. For the latency-sensitive intra-instance communication described above, all GPUs assigned to an instance must belong to the same node, which makes the available GPUs non-interchangeable[45, 50]. This node-locality constraint is the structural source of the fragmentation problem studied in this paper. Each node contains eight GPUs, matching the configura-tion reported in production clusters[15, 22, 35, 44]. The eight-GPU design has a hardware basis: DGX-1 connects eight GPUs as a hybrid cube-mesh, and later DGX/HGX systems preserve eight GPUs as a server-level building block while improving the internal fabric with NVSwitch[26, 35, 36]. This eight-GPU node is an industry-wide convention rather than an NVIDIA-specific choice, as the vendor-neutral OCP OAM Universal Baseboard standard[37] hosts eight accelerators per baseboard and mainstream accelerator servers adopt the same 𝐺 = 8 layout, including AMD Instinct[1], Intel Gaudi[20], Huawei Ascend[18], and Meta’s Grand Teton[29]. 

> 2COMPASS-ABS

## 3 Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation 

This section gives the measure of resource fragmentation without relying on history trace information. In §3.1, we in-troduce the notion of partial-nodes, which are the principal carrier of fragmented resource, and separate them into two mutually exclusive proportions. Building on this distinction, §3.2 then defines a new measure called Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation (SIF), computed solely from the resource de-mand of currently running jobs in the cluster. 

3.1 Key Insight: Avoidable vs. Forced Partial Nodes 

We firstly define a node that is non-empty yet assigned fewer GPUs than its full capacity as a partial node . A fragmented placement disperses free GPUs across many partial nodes and causes contiguous GPU resources to become scarce, whereas a well-designed placement will reduce the partial-node count to release the fragmented GPUs trapped inside partial nodes and return them to larger contiguous GPU blocks, which is friendly to all DLT jobs. This concern becomes most pressing when the cluster receives large jobs. Consider a job consisting of 𝑤 8-GPU instances which require 𝑤 fully-empty nodes on the cluster before it can be admitted. Consider a cluster of 𝑁 nodes in which the current fragmented placement consumes 𝑁 1

nodes, whereas a compact placement of the same set of run-ning DLT jobs would consume only 𝑁 2 < 𝑁 1. The compact placement therefore leaves 𝑁 − 𝑁 2 nodes entirely empty, while the fragmented one leaves only 𝑁 − 𝑁 1. Whenever the requested job size satisfies 𝑁 − 𝑁 1 < 𝑤 ≤ 𝑁 − 𝑁 2, that job is admissible under the compact placement but is blocked un-der the fragmented one, even though the cluster’s aggregate free-GPU count exceeds 8 𝑤 in both situations. This large DLT job blocking results from fully-empty-node availability: 

𝑁 1 − 𝑁 2 nodes trapped in partial occupancy could otherwise serve as the continuous GPU blocks that large jobs demand. We therefore set our primary objective for mitigating frag-mentation as minimizing the number of partial nodes ,which can equivalently be stated as minimizing the total number of nodes in use. We adopt the former formulation throughout the remainder of this paper. However, not ev-ery partial node is produced by the scheduler: some cannot be eliminated by any scheduler, while others arise from a suboptimal scheduling decision and can be eliminated by right placement and migration. Then we demonstrate the distinction through two illustrative examples. 

Forced partial nodes. Suppose the cluster currently has only one partial node, which hosts a single 4-GPU instance, a DLT job consisting of two 5-GPU instances waits at the head of queue. Due to intra-node constraint, neither of the two new instances can utilize the 4 free GPUs on this partial node. The only feasible placement is opening two other empty nodes, each hosting a single 5-GPU instance with 3 GPUs unused, so that the cluster now contains three partial nodes in total. No scheduler could have done better in this situation, because these three partial nodes are byproducts of systemic constraints rather than incorrect scheduling. 

Avoidable partial nodes. Consider two nodes that are each fully packed without free GPUs, where a single job has placed one 4-GPU instance on each node and the remaining 4 GPUs of each node are occupied by unrelated instances. When this job completes, both nodes simultaneously release a 4-GPU block and the cluster gains two partial nodes in a single event. This fragmentation is not structurally necessary, because the scheduler could migrate all instances on the second node into the idle region of the first, after which the cluster would contain zero partial nodes. The two partial nodes here are avoidable, because their existence is entirely attributable to the scheduler’s decision. 

3.2 Decomposing Fragmentation: Inherent and Scheduler-Induced 

Motivated by §3.1, we now formally split the fragmentation into two complementary components, the portion that any scheduler must leave behind, and the portion introduced by chosen scheduler 𝜋 .

Inherent Fragmentation. We denote the set of DLT jobs running on the cluster at time 𝑡 by J ( 𝑡 ). Each job 𝑖 ∈ J ( 𝑡 )

consists of 𝑤 𝑖 homogeneous instances, each demanding 𝑔 𝑖 

GPUs, where 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐺 } and 𝐺 = 8. The instantaneous demand structure of running DLT jobs is then formalized as I ( 𝑡 ) = {( 𝑔 𝑖 , 𝑤 𝑖 ) : 𝑖 ∈ J ( 𝑡 )} . In order to isolate the frag-mentation originating from constraints alone, we construct a static bin-packing problem in which each DLT job is treated as 𝑤 𝑖 items of size 𝑔 𝑖 and each node as a bin of capacity 𝐺 . The question then becomes: what is the minimum partial-node count achievable over all feasible packings of these items into bins? Formally, for any feasible packing 𝑃 that satisfies the intra-node constraint, we let 𝜈 (𝑃 ) denote the number of partial nodes in 𝑃 and write Φ★(𝑡 ) := min 𝑃 feasible 𝜈 (𝑃 ) for the minimum partial-node count achievable across all such packings. The Inherent fragmentation is then the normalised share 

𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) := Φ★(𝑡 )

𝑁 = min 𝑃 feasible 𝜈 (𝑃 )

𝑁 . (1) Because 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) depends only on the real time resource de-mand I ( 𝑡 ) and is independent of arrival order, placement history, or migration operation, it serves as an unavoidable lower bound on the partial-node share. A heuristic algo-rithm for computing Φ★(𝑡 ) (and therefore 𝐹 ★(𝑡 )) is provided in Appendix C. 

Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation. Under an online policy 𝜋 , the placement of all jobs in the cluster observed at time 𝑡 is itself a feasible packing 𝑃 𝜋 (𝑡 ) of I ( 𝑡 ), and we let 

𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) := 𝜈 (𝑃 𝜋 (𝑡 ))/ 𝑁 denote its partial-node share, which represents the gross fragmentation. We define the Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation (SIF) by subtracting the inherent 

> 3Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

fragmentation from the gross fragmentation: SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) := 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) − 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) ≥ 0, (2) which represents the percentage of avoidable partial nodes that the policy 𝜋 has produced. This definition makes SIF a more reasonable fragmentation measure than the statis-tical metrics reported in FGD and CAFGD. It builds upon the resource demand of the running jobs rather than further historical information about the workload resource demand distribution. Moreover, it accurately quantifies the propor-tion of fragmentation that is introduced by the scheduler. Therefore, it motivates us to design a scheduler that persis-tently keeps SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) at a low level. 

## 4 COMPASS-ABS Scheduler 

This section presents our COMPASS-ABS scheduler that employs the COMPASS algorithm to maintain the cluster evolving in the compact ABS domain. In Section 4.1, we in-troduce our design motivation for the innovative scheduler; In Section 4.2, we define a feasible space ABS for the cluster to operate in, driven by the characteristic of workload com-position and cluster topology; In Section 4.3, we present the COMPASS algorithm that constrains the cluster state within the ABS in a consolidated manner. In Section 4.4, we further provide theoretical guarantee on the ability of our scheduler to keep SIF low at minimal computational cost. 

4.1 Design Rationale Observation 1: Power-of-two-sized multi-GPU instances scheduled by the best-fit policy when node capacity is 8 keep SIF ≤ 2 

> 𝑁

. Before examining fragmentation in de-tail, we set aside the instances whose 𝑔 𝑖 = 1, denoted as 

I=1, because they never create fragmentation but rather act as the natural filler units to mitigate fragmentation by utilizing the scattered idle GPUs left on partial nodes. Re-stricting attention to the multi-GPU instances, denoted as 

I≥2, we exploit a divisibility alignment between the instance demand and the node capacity: every 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8} divides 

𝐺 = 8 exactly, so any combination of such instances either fully fills a node or leaves a residue GPU block of size in 

{2, 4, 6}. Under this alignment, a best-fit policy that places each instance on the node leaving the smallest remaining ca-pacity after placement, together with a lightweight Compact pass that consolidates partial nodes after every departure, retains SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2 

> 𝑁

at all times. The formal proof, includ-ing the matching tightness construction, is deferred to Ap-pendix A. We accordingly name the multi-GPU instances with 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8} as Fragmentation-Friendly instances 

and denote them by IFF , whereas instances whose demand falls in {3, 5, 6, 7} are called Fragmentation-Unfriendly instances , denoted by IFUF , so all multi-GPU instances can be partitioned into I≥2 := IFF ∪ I FUF .

Observation 2: Fragmentation-unfriendly instances account for only a small share of real DLT workloads. 

The structural reasons in §2.1 make 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8} the natu-ral operating regime for DLT instances, so non-power-of-two instance sizes 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 3, 5, 6, 7} account for only a small frac-tion of the instance population in production traces. Table 1 confirms this claim by reporting the average per-type in-stance shares observed on the GFS[7] and Venus[15] traces, where the 𝑔 𝑖 = 1 and 𝑔 𝑖 = 8 classes together dominate the trace and the IFUF retains only a marginal share. These observations lead to two design ideas. 

Design idea 1: Round every fragmentation-unfriendly instance into a fragmentation-friendly composite block with fillers. Observation 1 already points out that a best-fit placement keeps SIF ≤ 2 

> 𝑁

once the workload is restricted to power-of-two-sized instances, and we therefore want to extend the same guarantee to the fragmentation-unfriendly population. To this end, we round instance in IFUF into a friendly-sized composite block whose total size falls in 

{2, 4, 8} by combining it with smaller instances. Then the scheduler only sees fragmentation-friendly-shaped blocks rather than a heterogeneous mixture of friendly and un-friendly demands under this transformation, so that the placement decisions on the entire multi-GPU population 

I≥2 reduce to the IFF -only case. 

Design idea 2: Employ 1-GPU instances to assemble the fragmentation-friendly composite blocks and man-age them in a dedicated pool. As 1-GPU instances largely outweigh those in IFUF and they are the natural filler units to mitigate fragmentation, we accordingly use 1-GPU in-stances to fill the residual GPUs inside each composite block, namely the gap between the original unfriendly instance and its rounded friendly block. Due to the dynamic arrival and departure of IFUF instances, the requests for fillers change over time, and the cluster needs to adaptively migrate 1-GPU instances to the right place to maintain the integrity of the composite block. This motivates us to place all 1-GPU instances in a unified pool for better management. 

Table 1. Per-class instance share across two DLT traces.             

> Trace I=1IFF IFUF I=8
> GFS 64.16% 6.07% 0.05% 29.73% Venus 37.68% 9.44% 0.44% 52.44%

4.2 Anchor-Based Space (ABS) 

Driven by the design ideas above, we define a structured state space for the cluster that we call the Anchor-Based Space (ABS) , within which the placement of all DLT jobs is required to remain throughout the cluster’s evolution. Then we formalize the key objects in the ABS domain. 

Definition 1 (Slot) . A slot , denoted by 𝑠 , is a GPU block inside a node. Each slot has a fixed width 𝑤 (𝑠 ) ∈ { 2, 4, 8}.

> 4COMPASS-ABS

When a multi-GPU instance of demand 𝑔 is assigned to a slot, the slot width is chosen according to 

𝑤 ★(𝑔 ) =



2, 𝑔 = 2,

4, 𝑔 ∈ { 3, 4},

8, 𝑔 ∈ { 5, 6, 7, 8}.

(3) The instances belonging to IFF will directly saturate width-matched slots, while counterpart instances will be assigned to rounded-up slots. 

Definition 2 (Anchor and Slot Vacancy) . On each slot 𝑠 ,there is exactly one instance 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ∈ I ≥2 called the anchor 

of 𝑠 that occupies 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) GPUs in that slot, where 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) is the demand of that instance. The remaining 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) GPUs in the slot are called the slot vacancy of 𝑠 . Whenever 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ≠ ∅,the slot width satisfies 𝑤 (𝑠 ) = 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ).

Definition 3 (Filler and Capacity Invariant) . When the slot vacancy of 𝑠 ≠ 0, we only employ 1-GPU instances to satu-rate the slot vacancy, which are called fillers . Representing the set of fillers currently attached to 𝑠 as 𝐹 (𝑠 ), we require 

𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) + | 𝐹 (𝑠 )| ≤ 𝑤 (𝑠 ). (4) Equality means the slot is fully used. 

Definition 4 (Slotted node and slot configuration set) . Node 

𝑛 that hosts at least one slot is called a slotted node , and we denote the multiset of slots currently profiled on 𝑛 by 𝑆 (𝑛 ),where the slots in 𝑆 (𝑛 ) are non-overlapping. The residual 

𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) GPUs on 𝑛 have not yet been profiled as any slot, and a new slot is created over them only when an anchor is placed on 𝑛 . The collection of all feasible slot profiling plans forms the slot configuration set 

SlotConf :=

n

{𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠 𝑘 } 𝑠 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8} ∀ 𝑖, 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑠 𝑖 ≤ 𝐺 

o

,

(5) where 𝑆 (𝑛 ) ∈ SlotConf , ∀𝑛 .

Definition 5 (Pool node) . A pool node is a node dedicated to 1-GPU instances. For a pool node 𝑛 , we write 𝑃 (𝑛 ) ⊆ I =1

for the set of 1-GPU instances currently on 𝑛 , with |𝑃 (𝑛 )| ≤ 

𝐺 . A 1-GPU instance on a pool node is not acting as a filler but can be moved to the slot vacancy when necessary. Building on the definitions above, every node in the cluster falls into three mutually exclusive types: an empty node holds no instances, a slotted node whose 𝑆 (𝑛 ) ∈ SlotConf ,and a pool node whose 𝑃 (𝑛 ) ⊆ I =1. We accordingly collect these three labels into the node-type set 

T := { empty , pool , slotted }, (6) and write 𝑡 (𝑛 ) ∈ T for the type currently assigned to node 𝑛 .This coarse classification underlies the formal definition of the feasible cluster state space Σ given below. 

Anchor-Based Space (ABS) Σ. For each node 𝑛 , the in-ternal state 𝜎 𝑛 is determined by 𝑡 (𝑛 ):

𝜎 𝑛 =



⊥, 𝑡 (𝑛 ) = empty ,𝑃 (𝑛 ) ⊆ I =1, |𝑃 (𝑛 )| ≤ 𝐺, 𝑡 (𝑛 ) = pool ,

 (𝑎 𝑗 , 𝐹 𝑗 )𝑘 𝑗 =1, 𝑡 (𝑛 ) = slotted .

(7) where 𝑎 𝑗 ∈ I ≥2, 𝐹 𝑗 ⊆ I =1 and together satisfy the capacity invariant in (4). The cluster-level state space is therefore 

Σ =

n

𝜎 =  𝜋, (𝜎 𝑛 )𝑛 ∈ N 

 𝜋 : N → T, 𝜎 𝑛 as above 

o

. (8) This state-space design is organized entirely around the notion of anchor, which provides a unified scheduling unit for both fragmentation-friendly and fragmentation-unfriendly multi-GPU instances. Starting from this concept, the gap be-tween a slot’s width and its anchor’s actual demand naturally introduces fillers to absorb the residual capacity inside each slot, and the practical need to migrate these fillers flexibly across the cluster in turn motivates the design of pool nodes as the dedicated pool for 1-GPU instances. Therefore, we name this state space Σ as Anchor-Based Space (ABS). 

4.3 COMPASS Algorithm 

We propose the COMPact-ASSured (COMPASS) algorithm that consists of three operators, the Place and Remove opera-tors together guarantee that the cluster state lies within ABS 

Σ as the job is admitted and completed, while the Compact 

ensures the compactness of ABS Σ.Each DLT job is admitted only when all of its instances can be placed simultaneously and is released as a whole upon completion. We therefore formulate scheduling decisions at the instance granularity, where every job-level scheduling is translated into a sequence of per-instance operations whose union realises the corresponding job-level decision, and for an instance 𝑖 we write 𝑔 𝑖 for its GPU demand. 

4.3.1 Common Notation. We write 𝜎 ∈ Σ for the current cluster state, D for the set of legal destinations where a single instance can be assigned, and M★ for the space of finite migration lists. A destination 𝑑 ∈ D takes one of four forms: a slotted node where a new slot of the required width can be profiled, a slot vacancy of an anchored slot, a partial pool node, or an empty node waiting to be opened. A single migration is written as a pair (𝑖, 𝑑 ) that moves instance 𝑖 to destination 𝑑 , and the update notation 𝜎 ⊕ 𝑀 means that the migrations in 𝑀 ∈ M ★ are applied to 𝜎 in sequence. 

4.3.2 Place Operator. The placement operator carries the signature Place : Σ × I → D × M ★, which takes the cur-rent cluster state 𝜎 together with an arriving instance 𝑖 and returns the destination 𝑑 where 𝑖 is to be installed alongside the migration list 𝑀 .If 𝑖 ∈ I ≥2, the scheduler searches for a slotted node with at least 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) ∈ { 2, 4, 8} free GPUs, or opens a fresh empty node if none exists; it then profiles a width-𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) slot and 

> 5Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

places 𝑖 as the anchor. When 𝑖 ∈ I FUF , the scheduler migrates up to 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) − 𝑔 𝑖 1-GPU instances from the pool nodes as fillers, subject to filler availability in the pool. If 𝑖 ∈ I =1, the scheduler places 𝑖 following a strict priority order: into an existing slot vacancy if one exists; otherwise into a partial pool node; and only resorts to a newly opened pool node when neither exists. This order lets the 1-GPU instance firstly mitigate existing fragmentation before acti-vating any new slotted node. 

Pseudocode of Place (𝜎, 𝑖 ).Input: state 𝜎 ; arriving instance 𝑖 with demand 𝑔 𝑖 

Output: destination 𝑑 ∈ D ; migration list 𝑀 ∈ M ★

1: 𝑀 ← ∅ 

2: if 𝑔 𝑖 ≥ 2 then 

3: 𝑤 ← 𝑤 ★ (𝑔 𝑖 )

4: Ncand ← { 𝑛 : 𝑡 (𝑛 ) = slotted , 𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) ≥ 𝑤 }

5: if Ncand ≠ ∅ then 𝑛 ★ ← arg min 𝑛 ∈ N cand 

 𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 )

6: else pick any empty node 𝑛 ★ and set 𝑡 (𝑛 ★) ← slotted 

7: profile a fresh slot 𝑠 ★ of width 𝑤 on 𝑛 ★; set 𝑎 (𝑠 ★) ← 𝑖 ; 𝑑 ← 𝑠 ★

8: 𝑟 ← 𝑤 − 𝑔 𝑖 

9: if 𝑟 > 0 then draw up to 𝑟 1-GPU instances {𝑓 1, . . . , 𝑓 𝑘 } from pool nodes; 𝑀 ← {( 𝑓 ℓ , 𝑠 ★) : ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝑘 }

10: else (𝑔 𝑖 = 1)

11: if ∃ 𝑠 with 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) + | 𝐹 (𝑠 )| < 𝑤 (𝑠 ) then 𝑑 ← 𝑠 

12: else if ∃ 𝑛 with 𝑡 (𝑛 ) = pool and |𝑃 (𝑛 )| < 𝐺 then 𝑑 ← 𝑛 

13: else pick any empty node 𝑛 0; set 𝑡 (𝑛 0) ← pool ; 𝑑 ← 𝑛 0

14: return (𝑑, 𝑀 )

4.3.3 Remove Operator. The departure operator carries the signature Remove : Σ × I → M ★, which returns the migrations triggered when instance 𝑖 departs from state 𝜎 .If 𝑖 ∈ I ≥2 , it serves as the anchor 𝑎 (𝑠 ) of slot 𝑠 . The operator dissolves 𝑠 by releasing 𝑤 (𝑠 ) GPUs, and migrates each filler in 𝐹 (𝑠 ) into the pool node through the same 1-GPU rule that Place applies to it; the migration M = ∅ when 

𝑎 (𝑠 ) ∈ I FF , since 𝐹 (𝑠 ) = ∅ in that case. If 𝑖 ∈ I =1, the operator releases 𝑖 from its current location, which is either on a slotted node or a pool node. In the former case, it additionally migrates another 1-GPU instance from the pool to keep the slot saturated. 

Pseudocode of Remove (𝜎, 𝑖 ).Input: state 𝜎 ; departing instance 𝑖 

Output: migration list 𝑀 ∈ M ★

1: 𝑀 ← ∅ 

2: if 𝑔 𝑖 ≥ 2 then (𝑖 is an anchor) 

3: 𝑠 ← the slot whose anchor is 𝑖 

4: for each 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 (𝑠 ) do 

5: choose destination 𝑑 𝑓 for 𝑓 by the 1-GPU rule of Place 

6: append (𝑓 , 𝑑 𝑓 ) to 𝑀 

7: end for 

8: dissolve 𝑠 and release its 𝑤 (𝑠 ) GPUs on the host node 9: else (𝑔 𝑖 = 1)

10: detach 𝑖 from its current slot vacancy or pool node 11: return 𝑀 

4.3.4 Compact Operator. We denote the compaction op-erator by Compact : Σ → M ★, which runs after each job event, namely the arrival or departure of each DLT job. It per-forms consolidation via three sequential calls to a per-class subroutine BestFitDrain 

Within each invocation, BestFitDrain identifies the par-tial hosts currently holding class-C items, orders them by descending room so that the sparsest source is processed first, and migrates the items of that source one by one into the partial host whose remaining class-C room is the small-est among those still able to accept the migrated item. For the three concrete classes used by Compact , the pool pass takes 1-GPU instances as items and pool nodes as hosts with room 𝐺 − | 𝑃 (𝑛 )| , while the width-4 and width-2 passes take anchored slots of the corresponding width as items and slotted nodes as hosts with room ⌊𝐷 (𝑛 )/ 4⌋ and ⌊𝐷 (𝑛 )/ 2⌋

respectively, where 𝐷 (𝑛 ) = 𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ).

Pseudocode of Compact (𝜎 ).Input: state 𝜎 

Output: migration list 𝑀 ∈ M ★

1: 𝑀 ← ∅ 

2: for each class C ∈ ⟨ pool , w4 , w2 ⟩ do 

3: N ← { 𝑛 : 0 < count C (𝑛 ) < cap C (𝑛 ) } 

4: sort N by room C (·) in descending order 5: while |N | ≥ 2 do 

6: 𝑛 src ← head (N) ; progress ← false 7: for each class-C item 𝑥 on 𝑛 src do 

8: S ← { 𝑛 ∈ N \ { 𝑛 src } : room C (𝑛 ) ≥ size (𝑥 ) } 

9: if S = ∅ then break 

10: 𝑛 dst ← arg min 𝑛 ∈ S room C (𝑛 )

11: migrate 𝑥 from 𝑛 src to 𝑛 dst ; append to 𝑀 ; progress ← true 12: end for 

13: if 𝑛 src has no class-C item left then remove 𝑛 src from N

14: if not progress then break 

15: end while 

16: end for 

17: return 𝑀 

Notation. For class C ∈ { pool , w4 , w2 }, count C (𝑛 ) is the num-ber of class-C items currently on 𝑛 , cap C (𝑛 ) is the maximum number of class-C items that 𝑛 can hold, room C (𝑛 ) = cap C (𝑛 ) − 

count C (𝑛 ), and size (𝑥 ) = 1 in all three classes. The local variables 

𝑛 src and 𝑛 dst denote, respectively, the source node from which an item is migrated and the destination node into which it is migrated within the current best-fit drain pass. 

4.4 Theoretical Guarantees 

We now state the main theoretical properties of the COMPASS-ABS scheduler. Proposition 1 validates that COMPASS con-fines the cluster state to the ABS domain Σ throughout. The-orem 1 is the main claim of this section and shows that COMPASS-ABS keeps SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) bounded by 2 /𝑁 whenever the 

> 6COMPASS-ABS

Algorithm 1 The COMPASS algorithm: online event handler that composes the Place , Remove , and Compact operators to evolve the cluster state 𝜎 inside the compact ABS Σ.                                                                                           

> Input: initial state 𝜎 0∈Σ; online event stream ⟨𝑒 1, 𝑒 2, . . . ⟩, in which each event 𝑒 𝑘 is either the arrival or the departure of a DLT job 𝑗 with 𝑤 𝑗 instances
> Output: evolving state 𝜎 updated after every event 1: 𝜎 ←𝜎 0
> 2: for each event 𝑒 in arrival order do
> 3: if 𝑒 is the arrival of job 𝑗 then
> 4: for 𝑘 :=1,2, . . . , 𝑤 𝑗 do
> 5: 𝑖 ←the 𝑘 -th instance of 𝑗
> 6: (𝑑, 𝑀 ) ← Place (𝜎, 𝑖 )
> 7: install 𝑖 at 𝑑 and then apply 𝑀 to 𝜎
> 8: end for
> 9: 𝜎 ←𝜎 ⊕Compact (𝜎 )
> 10: else if 𝑒 is the departure of job 𝑗 then
> 11: for 𝑘 :=1,2, . . . , 𝑤 𝑗 do
> 12: 𝑖 ←the 𝑘 -th instance of 𝑗
> 13: 𝑀 ←Remove (𝜎, 𝑖 )
> 14: remove 𝑖 from its current location and then apply 𝑀 to
> 𝜎
> 15: end for
> 16: 𝜎 ←𝜎 ⊕Compact (𝜎 )
> 17: end if
> 18: end for
> 19: return 𝜎

workload satisfies a realistic composition condition. Propo-sition 2 characterises the per-operator computational com-plexity of the COMPASS algorithm. Detailed proofs of all three results are deferred to Appendix B. 

Proposition 1 (State-Space Invariance) . For any initial state 

𝜎 0 ∈ Σ and any event sequence of job arrivals and job de-partures, every state produced by the COMPASS algorithm (Algorithm 1) remains in Σ.

Theorem 1 (Compactness under the Workload Composition Condition) . Let 𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 ) denote the number of active instances of per-GPU demand 𝑔 ∈ { 1, . . . , 8} at time 𝑡 , write 𝑛 total (𝑡 ) =

Í8 

> 𝑔 =1

𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 ) for the total active instance count, and let 𝑝 𝑔 (𝑡 ) :=

𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 )/ 𝑛 total (𝑡 ) denote the per-class instance share. Suppose that at every time 𝑡 the workload composition satisfies the 

Workload Composition Condition 

𝑝 1 (𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑝 3 (𝑡 ) + 3 𝑝 5 (𝑡 ) + 2 𝑝 6 (𝑡 ) + 𝑝 7 (𝑡 ). (9) 

Then in every cluster state 𝜎 (𝑡 ) produced by Algorithm 1 in response to the online event stream, at most one slotted node is non-fully-packed and at most one pool node is non-fully-packed, and consequently the online placement produced by COMPASS-ABS satisfies 

SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝑁 , ∀ 𝑡 ≥ 0 (10) 

where 𝑁 is the total number of nodes in the cluster. 

Proposition 2 (Operational Complexity of COMPASS) . The three operators that compose COMPASS satisfy 

T ( Place ) = 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ),

T ( Remove ) = 𝑂 (1),

T ( Compact ) = 𝑂 (𝑁 ),

(11) 

where 𝑁 denotes the number of nodes in the cluster. 

## 5 Experimental Evaluation 

5.1 Testbed 

We evaluate our scheduler in both a physical cluster and a simulation system. Our implementation is available at https: //anonymous.4open.science/r/COMPASSABSF02A/ .For the physical experiments, our scheduler runs as a controller process that launches and migrates real PyTorch training jobs on a small cluster of four servers each equipped with eight NVIDIA A100-40GB GPUs, and each migration is realized through a checkpoint-and-restart protocol on the actual training processes. For the simulation experiments, we develop an event-driven simulator in Python to reproduce DLT job production in a shared GPU cluster. To faithfully reflect production be-havior, our simulator reproduces the latency incurred by the checkpoint-based migration mechanism[12, 50]. 

5.2 Cluster Configuration 

To validate our scheduler under both contended and loose resource regimes, we replay real traces (or deploy realistic jobs) on a range of cluster scales defined as follows. Let 

J[𝑇 1,𝑇 2 ] represent the jobs submitted in a chosen window 

[𝑇 1,𝑇 2], and let 

𝐷 (𝑡 ) =∑︁   

> 𝑗 ∈ J [𝑇 1,𝑇 2]

𝐺 𝑗 ⊮𝑎 𝑗 ≤ 𝑡 < 𝑎 𝑗 + 𝜏 𝑗 

 (12) denote their concurrent GPU demand, with 𝐺 𝑗 = 𝑊 𝑗 𝑔 𝑗 . We define the window’s 𝜂 -th percentile demand 𝑝 𝜂 as the small-est level ℓ that 𝐷 stays below for at least an 𝜂 fraction of its support. The cluster for this window is then sized at 

𝑁 (𝜂 ) = max 

𝑝 𝜂 /8 , 𝑁 maxjob 

(13) nodes, where 𝑁 maxjob is the minimum node count required to host the largest single job in J[𝑇 1,𝑇 2 ] under the intra-node constraint and gang scheduling requirement. 

5.3 Trace 

Our simulation is conducted on two real production traces, Venus[15] and GFS[7]. Both traces record the number of in-stances, per-instance GPU demand, submission time, and duration of each job. As an initial preprocessing step, we retain only the DLT jobs that consist of homogeneous in-stances with identical integer GPU demand. For the physical deployment, we synthesize a DLT trace ( Phys-Mix ) span-ning CV[6, 14], NLP[5], LLM[39], recommender system[11], 

> 7Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

and multi-modal[38] training tasks, whose resource demand characteristics are aligned with those observed in the two traces above. 

5.4 Comparison 

We compare our scheduler against the six state-of-the-art methods. 

• GFS [7]: places each job’s instances on the nodes whose remaining GPU capacity most closely matches the per-instance demand, following a best-fit policy. 

• FGD [45]: selects the placement that minimizes the resulting increase in fragmentation they define. 

• CAFGD [24]: combines its lifecycle-aware fragmenta-tion measure with a wait-for-peak admission policy 

• MCG [48]: builds on FGD’s fragmentation-gradient principle and additionally estimates the demand distri-bution of pending jobs to reorder scheduling priorities. 

• FFT [30]: globally reorganizes the placement of all running jobs by solving an ILP at the start of each round, and schedules arriving jobs within each round using a best-fit. 

• DRR [49]: periodically migrates the jobs on the lowest-utilization node onto high-utilization target nodes at the start of each reschedule cycle, and places arriving jobs using a DRL policy trained via imitation learning from a best-fit heuristic. 

5.5 Metrics 

We evaluate COMPASS-ABS and the baselines using three metrics that together capture how effectively each scheduler mitigates the consequences of GPU fragmentation. Among them, AFR (and the underlying SIF) is a diagnostic quantity we introduce in this work to measure the cluster fragmen-tation state; others are key performance indicators for both users and vendors. Together they provide a complete assess-ment of scheduler efficiency. To focus on contention-induced behavior, we restrict the metrics indicating resource fragmentation degree and GPU utilization to the peak-demand period 

𝑇 peak = { 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 | 𝑄 (𝑡 ) ≠ ∅ } , (14) that is, the time within the observed window 𝑇 when the waiting queue 𝑄 (𝑡 ) is non-empty. 

Average Fragmentation Rate (AFR). The time-averaged cluster fragmentation level during 𝑇 peak , where the instanta-neous fragmentation SIF (𝑡 ) follows the definition in (2): AFR = 1

|𝑇 peak |

∫

> 𝑇 peak

SIF (𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 . (15) A lower AFR indicates that the scheduler keeps the cluster in a less fragmented cluster state under contention. 

Average Job Completion Time (AJCT). The mean com-pletion time across all DLT jobs submitted: AJCT = 1

𝑀 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝐶 𝑖 , (16) where 𝐶 𝑖 is the completion time of job 𝐽 𝑖 , equivalently de-fined as the sum of its queueing time in the waiting queue, its training time on the assigned GPUs and latency caused by mi-gration, and 𝑀 is the total number of jobs evaluated. A lower AJCT indicates that the scheduler admits and finishes jobs more efficiently, which directly shortens the user-perceived turnaround of DLT workloads. 

Average GPU Utilization (AGU). The time-averaged fraction of active GPUs in the cluster during 𝑇 peak :AGU = 1

|𝑇 peak |

∫

> 𝑇 peak

GU (𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡, GU (𝑡 ) ∈ [ 0, 1]. (17) A higher AGU indicates that the scheduler converts more of the available GPU capacity into productive work, which is critical under heavy GPU demand. 

## 6 Evaluation 

6.1 Overall Comparison 

We first evaluate the end-to-end performance of COMPASS-ABS against all baselines under a fixed resource regime (𝜂 = 0.90). The comparison spans two real production traces replayed in our simulator and Phys-Mix deployed on our physical cluster, with results reported in Fig. 1. Overall, COMPASS-ABS dominates the six baselines on every (metric, trace) pair. Concretely, COMPASS-ABS reduces AJCT by at least 212s, 135s and 736s and lifts AGU by at least 0 .7%, 2% and 16% over the strongest baseline on the Venus, GFS and Phys-Mix traces respectively, while simultaneously attain-ing the lowest AFR on all three traces with the measured AFR staying below 2 

> 𝑁

, which matches the theoretical bound proved in Section 4.4. COMPASS-ABS, DRR and FFT all sup-port migration-driven defragmentation, yet ours exceeds DRR and FFT for a structural reason: our migration policy is driven by the COMPASS algorithm to maintain the com-pactness of the predefined feasible state domain ABS, and is tightly coupled with the placement strategy rather than treated as a separate phase at fixed interval. 

6.2 Cluster Intensity Sensitivity 

To verify that the superiority of COMPASS-ABS over the six baselines is stable across different cluster resource pressures, we sweep the cluster-scaling parameter 𝜂 ∈ { 0.85 , 0.90 , 0.95 }

on the GFS trace, which carries the largest job count and ag-gregate GPU demand among the three traces and therefore offers the most discriminative regime for scheduler com-parison. Across all three intensity levels, COMPASS-ABS dominates all baselines on every metric reported in Fig. 2, with its AFR lying within the narrow band of 0.0023 to 0.0026 

> 8COMPASS-ABS

Figure 1. Overall comparison across three DLT workload traces ( 𝜂 = 0.90). 

Figure 2. Sensitivity to cluster resource intensity on the GFS trace 𝜂 ∈ { 0.85 , 0.90 , 0.95 }.and its AGU staying above 0.957, and neither metric exhibits any appreciable sensitivity to resource pressure across the three regimes. By contrast, the AJCT advantage of COMPASS-ABS over the strongest baseline widens monotonically as the cluster becomes tighter, growing from 74s at 𝜂 = 0.95 to 135s at 

𝜂 = 0.90 and ultimately to 201s at 𝜂 = 0.85. The mechanism behind is that fragmentation-induced queueing blockage grows increasingly severe as the cluster tightens: under tight resources, fragmented capacity is far less likely to be re-claimed by the natural departure of running jobs, whereas under loose resources such fragments are readily absorbed. COMPASS-ABS adaptively eliminates fragmentation in real time and thereby recovers this otherwise-trapped capacity, so its fragmentation-aware advantage translates into the largest AJCT reduction when the cluster is at its tightest. 

6.3 Robustness to Workload Composition 

To verify that the superiority of COMPASS-ABS over the six baselines is also stable across different per-instance GPU-demand distributions, we select three days whose composi-tions span the widest pairwise discrepancy across our traces (Table 2). Across all three compositions, COMPASS-ABS dom-inates every baseline on every metric reported in Fig. 3: its AFR is confined within [0.002 , 0.030 ] against the base-lines’ wider [0.058 , 0.324 ] band, its AGU stays above 0 .89 

> 9Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

against the baselines’ [0.77 , 0.90 ] range, and its AJCT leads the strongest baseline by 1,643 s on Venus day 92, 1,431 s on GFS day 58 and 145 s on GFS day 26. This robustness arises from the fact that the slot-pool lay-out exploits the dominance of the fragmentation-friendly 

{2, 4, 8}-GPU widths over the fragmentation-unfriendly {3, 5,

6, 7}-GPU widths in real DLT workloads, so the anchor-filler mechanism saturates the slots and the COMPASS algorithm confines the cluster state within a compact ABS configura-tion regardless of how the per-instance GPU-demand distri-bution shifts. The absolute AJCT lead is the largest on Venus day 92 because most of the JCT on this short-job workload is determined by scheduling decisions, whereas it shrinks on the two GFS days because their longer base runtimes dom-inate the JCT and leave a smaller scheduling-controllable share for any scheduler to optimize; even so, COMPASS-ABS still ranks first against other baselines. 

Table 2. Workload Composition of the Three Selected Days             

> Instance Size Ratio Day 1 GPU 2–7 GPU 8 GPU Venus Day 92 0.73 0.06 0.21 GFS Day 58 0.57 0.04 0.39 GFS Day 26 0.43 0.09 0.48

6.4 Workload Composition Condition: Coverage and Robustness on Violating Days 

The performance guarantee of COMPASS-ABS rests on The-orem 1, which assumes the cluster state satisfies the Work-load Composition Condition (WCC) at every scheduling tick. We therefore test how often the WCC holds and whether COMPASS-ABS keeps its advantage on days where it does not hold throughout. We replay every Venus and GFS day, measure each day’s WCC coverage 𝜌 , the fraction of its sched-uling horizon during which the WCC is satisfied, bucket the days by 𝜌 , and for each bucket and each metric in {AFR , AJCT ,

AGU } count the days on which COMPASS-ABS ranks top-1 among the seven evaluated schedulers (Table 3). The WCC is empirically dominant on both traces. On Venus, 487 of the 564 replayed days (86.3%) satisfy it through-out the entire horizon, and a further 51 days (9.0%) satisfy it for at least 90% of the horizon; on GFS it holds across the full horizon on all 552 days. The WCC-satisfying regime is thus the principal operating regime of production deployments rather than a corner case. Even on the Venus days where the WCC does not hold throughout, the top-1 frequency of COMPASS-ABS closely tracks that on the 𝜌 = 1 days. Across the five coverage buckets with 𝜌 < 1, it leads on AFR for 100% of the days in the three lower-coverage buckets [0, 0.1), [0.1, 0.7), and 

[0.7, 0.9) and for at least 88% in the two higher-coverage 

Table 3. Top-1 ranking frequency of COMPASS-ABS across WCC coverage 𝜌 buckets, grouped by (day , 𝜂 ) pairs.                                                              

> Trace 𝜌 Bucket |𝐷 |AFR JCT AGU Venus 1.0487 459 383 404 (94.3%) (78.6%) (83.0%)
> [0.99 ,1)26 24 18 20 (92.3%) (69.3%) (76.9%)
> [0.9,0.99 )25 22 16 16 (88.0%) (64.0%) (64.0%)
> [0.7,0.9)11 11 89(100%) (72.7%) (81.8%)
> [0.1,0.7)10 10 88(100%) (80.0%) (80.0%)
> [0,0.1)5555(100%) (100%) (100%)
> Total 564 531 453 462 (94.1%) (80.3%) (81.9%)
> GFS 1.0552 552 537 529 (100%) (97.3%) (95.9%)

buckets, while on AJCT and AGU it leads for at least 64% in every WCC-violating bucket and for 100% in the lowest-coverage bucket [0, 0.1). Aggregated across all 564 Venus days, the top-1 frequency reaches 94.1% on AFR, 80.3% on AJCT, and 81.9% on AGU, and on GFS 100%, 97.3%, and 95.9% respectively. COMPASS-ABS thus retains its advantage on all three metrics even outside this regime. 

6.5 Robustness to Migration Cost 

Empirical migration latencies in DLT clusters span the range of 1s to 10s, depending on the checkpoint-and-restore imple-mentation, the network topology and the model size [13, 30, 50, 51]; on our own physical cluster the average migration latency we measure is approximately 8s. We therefore verify that COMPASS-ABS maintains its superiority across the re-alistic range by sweeping the per-migration cost parameter 

𝑐 ∈ { 1, . . . , 10 } s on the GFS and Venus traces. As shown in Fig. 4, every one of the six panels exhibits essentially flat curves as the per-migration cost 𝑐 sweeps from 1 s to 10 s, because the three migration-capable sched-ulers each issue at most a small number of migrations per job and the cumulative cost contribution to any metric therefore stays well below one second per job even at 𝑐 = 10 s. More importantly, COMPASS-ABS attains the lowest AFR, the low-est AJCT and the highest AGU at every 𝑐 in the swept range on both GFS and Venus, including the 8 s neighborhood that corresponds to the latency we measure on our own cluster, so the end-to-end advantage of COMPASS-ABS is insulated against any realistic increase in the per-migration cost. 

6.6 Case Study of Fragmentation Dynamics 

We zoom into the 21:00–22:30 window of GFS day 113 under 

𝜂 = 0.95 to expose the time-resolved fragmentation mech-anism, with Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 reporting the dynamic 

> 10 COMPASS-ABS

Figure 3. Robustness to workload composition on three representative days (Venus Day 92, GFS Day 58, GFS Day 26) .

Figure 4. Robustness to per-migration cost on the GFS and Venus trace, 𝑐 ∈ [ 1, 10 ] s, 𝜂 = 0.90. 

𝑁 · SIF (the total number of avoidable partial nodes), GPU utilisation and fully-empty node counts respectively. All six practical baselines remain in continuous blocking through-out the window, with five of them attributing 100% of the blocking to fragmentation and DRR still 94 .6%, as verified by the aggregate idle GPU count strictly exceeding the head-of-line demand. Over 90% of the blocked jobs carry 𝑔 𝑖 = 8 with 

𝑤 𝑖 > 30, so the dominant blocking factor is the requirement for at least 𝑤 𝑖 fully empty 8-GPU nodes. On the fragmentation side, the five non-migration base-lines settle into a wide 60–80 partial-node band while FFT confines itself to a 25–50 band through periodic global mi-gration, but both ranges leave only 20–30 fully empty nodes against the 𝑤 𝑖 > 30 contiguous demand and trap GPU utili-sation within 0.8–0.9 for the entire window. COMPASS-ABS 

Figure 5. Dynamic number of avoidable partial nodes ( 𝑁 ·

SIF) by seven schedulers on GFS day 113 ( 𝜂 = 0.95). keeps 𝑁 · SIF bounded by 2 throughout, so its total blocking accumulates to only about 10 minutes, and although 72 .9% of that blocking is technically fragmentation-induced, the com-pact ABS layout together with its slot-pool migration mech-anism dispatches every such blockage within seconds and never lets fragmentation translate into long-period queue blocking or low utilisation. 

## 7 Related Work 

Most prior work on DLT job scheduling overlooks the quan-tification of resource fragmentation, asserting that they mit-igate fragmentation via tight packing, without providing a concrete metric[27, 40, 47]. FGD[45] was the first to pro-pose a statistical measure that estimates the expected in-stance capacity that the remaining resources can accommo-date, given prior knowledge of the resource demand distri-bution. Subsequent works refined this formulation on top 

> 11 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

of FGD: CAFGD[24] decomposed the demand probability into weighted long-term and short-term distributions, while MCG[48] incorporated load balance into the fragmentation metric. However, all of these approaches rely on historical workload information. Numerous studies aimed to reduce DLT job completion time and improve resource utilization by mitigating fragmen-tation. Existing schedulers can be broadly categorized into two types of approaches. Non-migration schedulers: These methods formulated scheduling as a multi-dimensional bin-packing problem[3, 8, 16, 42, 52]. ElasticFlow[9], Synergy[31], and GFS[7] adopted a best-fit strategy that dynamically places jobs on the node leaving the fewest idle GPUs. FGD[45], CAFGD[24], and MCG[48] scheduled jobs based on their re-spective fragmentation measures, preferring placements that minimize the increase between pre- and post-scheduling frag-mentation. These methods cannot reduce fragmentation that has already accumulated in the cluster. Migration-supporting schedulers: To address accumulated fragmentation, sched-ulers such as Gavel[33], Sia[21], and RASA[2] modeled the problem as a linear program computed by numerical solvers. However, the resulting time complexity and additional la-tency induced by frequent migrations are prohibitive for real-time scheduling in large-scale clusters[46]. To improve 

Figure 6. Dynamic GPU utilization by seven schedulers on GFS day 113 ( 𝜂 = 0.95). 

Figure 7. Dynamic free nodes by seven schedulers on GFS day 113 ( 𝜂 = 0.95). practicality, Hops[43], FFT[30] and DRR[49] employed a round-based migration strategy that performs global defrag-mentation by relocating running jobs to placements that incur less fragmentation. Nevertheless, these methods can-not correct fragmentation introduced within a round, leaving the cluster in a degraded state until the next defragmentation cycle. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we have presented Scheduler-Induced Fragmen-tation (SIF) for quantifying resource fragmentation together with COMPASS-ABS, a scheduler that reduces fragmentation in shared GPU clusters for DLT jobs. From the partial-nodes perspective, SIF removes the dependence on prior knowledge of the workload trace that earlier statistical metrics require, and isolates the portion of observed fragmentation resulting from scheduling policy. Building on this measure, COMPASS-ABS confines the cluster state to a structured feasible domain called the Anchor-Based Space (ABS), whose construction fully exploits the alignment between the GPU-demand pro-file of DLT instances and the cluster topology, so that the ac-companying COMPASS algorithm can dynamically maintain compactness inside ABS and keep SIF uniformly bounded by 2/𝑁 whenever the Workload Composition Condition holds. We validate our scheduler’s performance through large-scale simulation on production traces and through physical-cluster deployment with a synthetic DLT workload, both of which show that COMPASS-ABS attains higher GPU utilization and substantially shorter job completion time in the queue than the state-of-the-art baselines even when WCC is violated. Looking ahead, we identify three promising directions for extending COMPASS-ABS. First, we plan to generalize our scheduler to jointly handle both deep learning training and inference jobs in a shared GPU cluster, where the hetero-geneous latency requirements and resource profiles of the two workload types pose additional scheduling challenges. Second, when migrating jobs to amend fragmentation, the current design treats all jobs uniformly; a natural extension is to incorporate job-level priorities into the migration de-cision, selecting victims in a manner that respects Service Level Objectives (SLOs) and avoids penalizing high-priority workloads. Moreover, we further discuss how to extend our scheduler to the next-generation clusters with larger NVLink domains in Appendix D. 

## References       

> [1] Advanced Micro Devices. 2024. AMD Instinct MI300X Platform Data Sheet. Data sheet. https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/ documents/instinct-tech-docs/data-sheets/amd-instinct-mi300x-platform-data-sheet.pdf Accessed: 2026-06-09. [2] Zhe Chen, Fan Jiang, Bin Chen, Yu Li, Yi Zhang, Chao Huang, Run Yang, Fei Jiang, Jun Chen, Wei Xiang, Gang Cheng, Ran Shi, Nan Ma, Wenjie Zhang, and Tao Zhang. 2024. Resource Allocation with Service Affinity in Large-Scale Cloud Environments. In Proceedings
> 12

COMPASS-ABS 

of the IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE ’24) .IEEE, 5280–5293. doi: 10.1109/ICDE60146.2024.00397 

[3] Zhiyuan Chen, Xin Zhao, Chenglu Zhi, and Jianwei Yin. 2023. Deep-Boot: Dynamic Scheduling System for Training and Inference Deep Learning Tasks in GPU Cluster. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 34, 9 (2023), 2553–2567. doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2023. 3293835 

[4] Arnab Choudhury, Yang Wang, Tuomas Pelkonen, Kutta Srinivasan, Abha Jain, Shenghao Lin, Delia David, Siavash Soleimanifard, Michael Chen, Abhishek Yadav, Ritesh Tijoriwala, Denis Samoylov, and Chun-qiang Tang. 2024. MAST: Global Scheduling of ML Training across Geo-Distributed Datacenters at Hyperscale. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementa-tion (OSDI ’24) . USENIX Association, 563–580. [5] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT ’19) . 4171–4186. [6] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weis-senborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2021. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transform-ers for Image Recognition at Scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’21) .[7] Jiangfei Duan, Shenggui Xu, Shilong Qian, et al. 2026. GFS: A Preemption-aware Scheduling Framework for GPU Clusters with Pre-dictive Spot Instance Management. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-guages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’26) . ACM, 117–131. doi: 10.1145/3760250.3762231 

[8] Robert Grandl, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, Srikanth Kandula, Sriram Rao, and Aditya Akella. 2014. Multi-Resource Packing for Cluster Schedulers. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Conference on SIGCOMM (SIGCOMM ’14) . ACM, 455–466. doi: 10.1145/2619239.2626334 

[9] Diandian Gu, Yihao Zhao, Yinmin Zhong, Yifan Xiong, Zhenhua Han, Peng Cheng, Fan Yang, Gang Huang, Xin Jin, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2023. ElasticFlow: An Elastic Serverless Training Platform for Distributed Deep Learning. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’23) . ACM, 266–280. doi: 10.1145/3575693. 3575721 

[10] Juncheng Gu, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Kang G. Shin, Yibo Zhu, Myeong-jae Jeon, Junjie Qian, Hongqiang Harry Liu, and Chuanxiong Guo. 2019. Tiresias: A GPU Cluster Manager for Distributed Deep Learning. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’19) . USENIX Association, 485–500. [11] Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He. 2017. DeepFM: A Factorization-Machine based Neural Network for CTR Prediction. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI ’17) . 1725–1731. [12] Tanmaey Gupta, Sanjeev Krishnan, Rituraj Kumar, Abhishek Vi-jeev, Bhargav Gulavani, Nipun Kwatra, Ramachandran Ramjee, and Muthian Sivathanu. 2024. Just-in-time Checkpointing: Low Cost Error Recovery from Deep Learning Training Failures. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’24) .ACM, 1110–1125. doi: 10.1145/3627703.3650085 

[13] Jingoo Han, Mustafa Rafique, Luna Xu, Ali R. Butt, Seung-Hwan Lim, and Sudharshan Vazhkudai. 2020. MARBLE: A Multi-GPU Aware Job Scheduler for Deep Learning on HPC Systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGRID ’20) . IEEE, 272–281. doi: 10.1109/CCGrid49817. 2020.00-66 

[14] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR ’16) .IEEE, 770–778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90 

[15] Qinghao Hu, Peng Sun, Shengen Yan, Yonggang Wen, and Tianwei Zhang. 2021. Characterization and Prediction of Deep Learning Work-loads in Large-Scale GPU Datacenters. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC ’21) . ACM, 1–15. doi: 10.1145/3458817.3476223 

[16] Dawei Huang, Peng Du, Chuanwen Zhu, Hao Zhang, and Xudong Liu. 2015. Multi-Resource Packing for Job Scheduling in Virtual Machine Based Cloud Environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Service-Oriented System Engineering (SOSE ’15) . IEEE, 216–221. doi: 10. 1109/SOSE.2015.30 

[17] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, De-hao Chen, Mia Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. 2019. GPipe: Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks Using Pipeline Parallelism. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS ’19) ,Vol. 32. 103–112. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/ 093f65e080a295f8076b1c5722a46aa2-Abstract.html 

[18] Huawei Technologies. 2021. Atlas 800 Training Server (Model 9000) Data Sheet. Data sheet. https://www.cmc.ca/wp-content/uploads/ 2021/06/DatasheetAtlas800.pdf Accessed: 2026-06-09. [19] Changho Hwang, Wei Cui, Yifan Xiong, Ziyue Yang, Ze Liu, Han Hu, Zilong Wang, Rafael Salas, Jithin Jose, Prabhat Ram, Joe Chau, Peng Cheng, Fan Yang, Mao Yang, and Yongqiang Xiong. 2023. Tutel: Adap-tive Mixture-of-Experts at Scale. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys ’23) .[20] Intel Corporation. 2024. Intel Gaudi 3 AI Accelerator HLB-325 Baseboard Product Brief. Product brief. https: //www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/817489/intel-gaudi-3-ai-accelerator-hlb-325-baseboard-product-brief.html 

Accessed: 2026-06-09. [21] Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Daiyaan Arfeen, Shouxu Lin, Aurick Qiao, Zhihao Jia, and Gregory R. Ganger. 2023. Sia: Heterogeneity-aware, Goodput-optimized ML-cluster Scheduling. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’23) . ACM, 642–657. doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613175 

[22] Myeongjae Jeon, Shivaram Venkataraman, Amar Phanishayee, Junjie Qian, Wencong Xiao, and Fan Yang. 2019. Analysis of Large-Scale Multi-Tenant GPU Clusters for DNN Training Workloads. In Proceed-ings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’19) .USENIX Association, 947–960. [23] Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Yinmin Zhong, Qi Huang, Yangrui Chen, Zhi Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Xiang Li, Cong Xie, Shibiao Nong, Yulu Jia, Sun He, Hongmin Chen, Zhihao Bai, Qi Hou, Shipeng Yan, Ding Zhou, Yiyao Sheng, Zhuo Jiang, Haohan Xu, Haoran Wei, Zhang Zhang, Pengfei Nie, Leqi Zou, Sida Zhao, Liang Xiang, Zherui Liu, Zhe Li, Xiaoying Jia, Jianxi Ye, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. 2024. MegaScale: Scaling Large Language Model Training to More Than 10,000 GPUs. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’24) . USENIX Association, 745–760. [24] Huazheng Lao, Rui Xu, Long Chen, and Jinquan Zhang. 2025. CAFGD: Reduce Fragmentation in Large-Scale Multi-tenant Clusters for GPU Sharing Workloads. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS ’25) . IEEE, 133–143. doi: 10. 1109/ICDCS63083.2025.00022 

[25] Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. 2021. GShard: Scaling Giant Models with Conditional Computation and Automatic Sharding. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’21) .13 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu 

[26] Ang Li, Shuaiwen Leon Song, Jieyang Chen, Jiajia Li, Xu Liu, Nathan R. Tallent, and Kevin J. Barker. 2020. Evaluating Modern GPU Inter-connect: PCIe, NVLink, NV-SLI, NVSwitch and GPUDirect. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 31, 1 (2020), 94–110. doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2019.2928289 

[27] Jiamin Li, Hong Xu, Yibo Zhu, Zherui Liu, Chuanxiong Guo, and Cong Wang. 2023. Lyra: Elastic Scheduling for Deep Learning Clusters. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’23) . ACM, 835–850. doi: 10.1145/3552326.3587445 

[28] Shen Li, Yanli Zhao, Rohan Varma, Omkar Salpekar, Pieter Noordhuis, Teng Li, Adam Paszke, Jeff Smith, Brian Vaughan, Pritam Damania, and Soumith Chintala. 2020. PyTorch Distributed: Experiences on Ac-celerating Data Parallel Training. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 

13, 12 (2020), 3005–3018. doi: 10.14778/3415478.3415530 

[29] Meta Platforms. 2022. Grand Teton: Meta’s Next-Generation AI Platform. Open Compute Project Global Summit announce-ment. https://engineering.fb.com/2022/10/18/open-source/ocp-summit-2022-grand-teton/ Accessed: 2026-06-09. [30] Zizhao Mo, Huanle Xu, and Wing Cheong Lau. 2025. Fast and Fair Training for Deep Learning in Heterogeneous GPU Clusters. In Pro-ceedings of the 39th ACM International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS ’25) . ACM, 324–338. doi: 10.1145/3721145.3728488 

[31] Jayashree Mohan, Amar Phanishayee, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Vijay Chidambaram. 2022. Looking beyond GPUs for DNN Scheduling on Multi-Tenant Clusters. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’22) . USENIX Association, 579–596. [32] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil R. Devanur, Gregory R. Ganger, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Matei Zaharia. 2019. PipeDream: Generalized Pipeline Parallelism for DNN Training. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’19) . ACM, 1–15. doi: 10.1145/3341301.3359646 

[33] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Heterogeneity-Aware Cluster Scheduling Policies for Deep Learning Workloads. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’20) . USENIX Association, 481–498. [34] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGres-ley, Mostofa Patwary, Vijay Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catanzaro, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2021. Efficient Large-Scale Language Model Training on GPU Clusters Using Megatron-LM. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC ’21) . ACM, 1–15. doi: 10.1145/3458817.3476209 

[35] NVIDIA Corporation. 2017. NVIDIA DGX-1 with Tesla V100 System Architecture . Technical Report. NVIDIA Corpora-tion. https://images.nvidia.com/content/pdf/dgx1-v100-system-architecture-whitepaper.pdf 

[36] NVIDIA Corporation. 2026. NVIDIA DGX SuperPOD. Product page. 

https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/dgx-superpod/ Accessed: 2026-04-30. [37] Open Compute Project. 2023. OAI Universal Baseboard (UBB) Base Specification, Revision 2.0. Open Compute Project Foundation spec-ification. https://www.opencompute.org/documents/oai-ubb-base-specification-r2-0-v1-0-20230919-pdf Accessed: 2026-06-09. [38] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learn-ing Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML ’21) . 8748–8763. [39] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners . Technical Report. OpenAI. [40] Sudarsanan Rajasekaran, Manya Ghobadi, and Aditya Akella. 2024. CASSINI: Network-Aware Job Scheduling in Machine Learning Clus-ters. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’24) . USENIX Association, 1403– 1420. [41] Rajeev Thakur, Rolf Rabenseifner, and William Gropp. 2005. Opti-mization of Collective Communication Operations in MPICH. The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 19, 1 (2005), 49–66. doi: 10.1177/1094342005051521 

[42] Abhishek Verma, Madhukar Korupolu, and John Wilkes. 2014. Evalu-ating Job Packing in Warehouse-Scale Computing. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER ’14) .IEEE, 48–56. doi: 10.1109/CLUSTER.2014.6968735 

[43] Qinghe Wang, Futian Wang, and Xinwei Zheng. 2024. Hops: Fine-grained Heterogeneous Sensing, Efficient and Fair Deep Learning Cluster Scheduling System. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC ’24) . ACM, 1–17. doi: 10.1145/3698038. 3698515 

[44] Qizhen Weng, Wencong Xiao, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang, Cheng Wang, Jian He, Yong Li, Liping Zhang, Wei Lin, and Yu Ding. 2022. MLaaS in the Wild: Workload Analysis and Scheduling in Large-Scale Het-erogeneous GPU Clusters. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’22) . USENIX Association, 945–960. [45] Qizhen Weng, Lingyun Yang, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang, Xiaochuan Tang, Guodong Yang, and Liping Zhang. 2023. Beware of Fragmentation: Scheduling GPU-Sharing Workloads with Fragmentation Gradient Descent. In Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’23) . USENIX Association, 995–1008. [46] Gerhard J. Woeginger. 1997. There is No Asymptotic PTAS for Two-Dimensional Vector Packing. Inform. Process. Lett. 64, 6 (1997), 293–297. doi: 10.1016/S0020-0190(97)00179-8 

[47] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Zhihao Bai, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2023. Transparent GPU Sharing in Container Clouds for Deep Learning Workloads. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’23) . USENIX Association, 69–85. [48] Haijie Wu, Xinhua Wang, Xiaoxuan Luo, Wangbo Shen, and Weiwei Lin. 2025. MCG-Sched: Multi-Cluster GPU Scheduling for Resource Fragmentation Reduction and Load Balancing. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 36, 12 (2025), 2789–2802. doi: 10.1109/ TPDS.2025.3626153 

[49] Qing Wu, Pengfei Chen, and Yu Wang. 2025. Defragmentation Sched-uling with Deep Reinforcement Learning in Shared GPU Clusters. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC ’25) . ACM, 402–415. doi: 10.1145/3772052.3772242 

[50] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian Sivathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han, Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng, Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang, Fan Yang, and Lidong Zhou. 2018. Gan-diva: Introspective Cluster Scheduling for Deep Learning. In Proceed-ings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Im-plementation (OSDI ’18) . USENIX Association, 595–610. [51] Zhisheng Ye, Wei Gao, Qinghao Hu, Peng Sun, Xiaolin Wang, Ying-wei Luo, Tianwei Zhang, and Yonggang Wen. 2024. Deep Learning Workload Scheduling in GPU Datacenters: A Survey. Comput. Surveys 

56, 6 (2024), 1–38. doi: 10.1145/3638757 

[52] Yihao Zhao, Yuanqiang Liu, Yanghua Peng, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2022. Multi-Resource Interleaving for Deep Learning Training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIG-COMM ’22) . ACM, 428–440. doi: 10.1145/3544216.3544224 

14 COMPASS-ABS 

## A Compactness of Best-Fit on Power-of-Two Workloads 

This appendix formalises Observation 1 of Section 4.1. We consider the restricted setting in which every multi-GPU instance has demand 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8}, i.e. the active workload is contained in IFF , and the cluster runs a stripped-down variant of Algorithm 1: each arrival is handled by a single 

Place call that uses best-fit (no Compact pass on arrival), and each departure is handled by per-instance Remove calls followed by a single Compact pass on the departure side only. We show that this minimal policy is already sufficient to enforce SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2/𝑁 at all times, and we exhibit a finite event sequence that reaches the bound. 

A.1 Setup and statement 

Let the active workload consist of items of size 𝑔 ∈ { 2, 4, 8}

that arrive and depart online, and let each node be a bin of capacity 𝐺 = 8. We use Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) := 𝜈 (𝑃 𝜋 (𝑡 )) for the partial-node count under policy 𝜋 at time 𝑡 , with 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) = Φ𝜋 (𝑡 )/ 𝑁 

as in Section 3.2. The free space of a partial bin lies in {2, 4, 6},because used capacity attainable by sums of items in {2, 4, 8}

that strictly under-fill 𝐺 = 8 is one of {2, 4, 6}.

Proposition 3 (Best-Fit Compactness on Power-of-Two Work-loads) . Let the policy place every arriving instance via best-fit, i.e. on the node leaving the smallest remaining capacity after placement and opening a fresh node when no existing node can host the instance, and let every departure be followed by a single Compact pass. If every active instance has 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8},then for every 𝑡 ≥ 0 the state 𝜎 (𝑡 ) produced by the policy satisfies 

Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2 and SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝑁 ,

and both inequalities are tight in the sense that a finite arrival sequence reaches Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) = 2.

A.2 Proof of Proposition 3 

We bound Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) separately on the two event types and com-bine the bounds. Throughout, “bin” is interchangeable with “node” and “item” with “instance”. 

Part 1: best-fit on arrival leaves at most two partial bins. We first show that immediately after any arrival event the cluster state has at most two partial bins. Lemma B.1 (free-value uniqueness). At any time during the arrival pass, at most one partial bin has remaining free space 

𝑟 for each 𝑟 ∈ { 2, 4, 6}.

Proof. Suppose for contradiction that two partial bins 𝐴 

and 𝐵 have free space 𝑟 at the same time. Let 𝐵 be the bin whose free space last became 𝑟 , and consider the placement event that produced free (𝐵 ) = 𝑟 . Just before that place-ment, free (𝐴 ) = 𝑟 already held by hypothesis. The place-ment put an item of size 𝑠 into 𝐵 , with 𝑠 ≤ free (𝐵 )before and free (𝐵 )before − 𝑠 = 𝑟 , so free (𝐵 )before ≥ 𝑠 . If 𝐵 was a fresh bin, then free (𝐵 )before = 𝐺 = 8 and 𝑠 = 𝐺 − 𝑟 > 0; bin 

𝐴 also had free space 𝑟 ≥ 𝑠 , since 𝑟 = 𝐺 − 𝑠 and 𝐺 ≥ 𝑠 

forces 𝑟 ≥ 0, and we ruled out 𝑟 = 0 because 𝐴 is partial. Concretely, for every reachable 𝑟 ∈ { 2, 4, 6} the item size 

𝑠 = 𝐺 − 𝑟 ∈ { 6, 4, 2}, but only 𝑠 ∈ { 2, 4} are admissible power-of-two items (size 6 is not in the workload), so the only case is 𝑠 ∈ { 2, 4}, in which 𝐴 with free (𝐴 ) = 𝑟 also has free (𝐴 ) ≥ 𝑠 and best-fit would have picked 𝐴 over the fresh 𝐵 because the fresh bin has 𝐺 = 8 > 𝑟 . If 𝐵 was not fresh, then free (𝐵 )before > 𝑟 , so free (𝐴 ) = 𝑟 < free (𝐵 )before .Best-fit’s least-fit rule would then still have preferred 𝐴 over 

𝐵 , because 𝐴 leaves the smaller free space, provided 𝐴 can host the item. The admissibility condition free (𝐴 ) ≥ 𝑠 is exactly 𝑟 ≥ 𝑠 . It holds because the placement into 𝐵 re-quired free (𝐵 )before ≥ 𝑠 , and substituting 𝑟 = free (𝐵 )before −𝑠 

rewrites 𝑟 ≥ 𝑠 as free (𝐵 )before ≥ 2𝑠 . The only case where free (𝐴 ) < 𝑠 is when 𝑟 < 𝑠 , but this is already excluded by the construction free (𝐵 )before = 𝑟 + 𝑠 and the item size 𝑠 being one of {2, 4} which gives 𝑟 + 𝑠 ≤ 𝐺 hence 𝑟 ≤ 𝐺 − 𝑠 . In every admissible sub-case best-fit’s tie-breaking prefers 𝐴 ,contradicting the placement having gone to 𝐵 . □

Lemma B.2 (free-six isolation). If some partial bin has free space 6, then no other partial bin exists at the same time. 

Proof. A bin with free = 6 contains exactly one size-2 item. Consider the most recent placement that put this size-2 item into the bin. The bin was empty just before the placement, because no other item-size combination from {2, 4, 8} yields used capacity 2. Best-fit opens a fresh empty bin only when no existing partial bin admits the item. The arriving item has size 2, so an admissible partial bin would only require free ≥ 2, which every partial bin satisfies because every partial free value lies in {2, 4, 6}. Hence no partial bin existed at the moment the size-2 item was placed in the fresh bin, and the new free = 6 bin is the sole partial bin at that instant. Each subsequent arrival event either (i) places a size-2 item, which best-fit routes into the existing free = 6 bin and reduces its free space to 4, removing it from the free = 6class; or (ii) places a size-4 item, which best-fit routes into the existing free = 6 bin and reduces its free space to 2; or (iii) places a size-8 item, which opens a fresh bin that immediately becomes full and creates no new partial bin. In none of these cases is a second partial bin created while the original free = 6 bin still has free space 6, so the isolation invariant is preserved until the next departure event. □

Lemma B.3 (two-partial bound). At any time immediately after an arrival placement, the cluster has at most two partial bins, and the only reachable two-partial configuration has free spaces {2, 4}.

Proof. Combining Lemmas B.1 and B.2, the set of free-space values present across partial bins is a subset of {2, 4, 6} in which each value appears at most once, and the value 6 

> 15 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

cannot coexist with any other partial bin. Hence the only feasible multisets of free-space values across partial bins are 

∅, {2}, {4}, {6}, {2, 4}, {2, 6}, {4, 6} from cardinality counting, and the last two are forbidden by Lemma B.2. The remaining configurations have at most two partial bins. □

Part 2: Compact on departure leaves at most one par-tial bin. Departures invoke a single Compact pass after the per-instance Remove calls have been applied. Under the present restriction I=1 = ∅, IFUF = ∅, so the active 1-GPU population 𝑛 1 (𝑡 ) is identically zero and the total slot va-cancy aggregated across anchored fragmentation-unfriendly instances is identically zero. The Workload Composition Condition (9) therefore reduces to 0 ≥ 0 and holds trivially at every time. Lemma A.3 of Appendix B then contributes zero non-fully-packed pool nodes because no pool nodes exist, and Lemma A.4 of Appendix B contributes at most one non-fully-packed slotted node from the width-4 and width-2 BestFitDrain passes. The post-departure state therefore satisfies Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 1. 

Combining the two parts. The cluster state changes only at event boundaries. After every arrival event Part 1 gives 

Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2, and after every departure event Part 2 gives 

Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 1 ≤ 2. The bound Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2 therefore holds at every event boundary and extends to every continuous time instant between consecutive events, so 

Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2,𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) = Φ𝜋 (𝑡 )

𝑁 ≤ 2

𝑁 ,

SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝑁 .

for all 𝑡 ≥ 0, where the last inequality uses the non-negativity of the inherent fragmentation 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) from Section 3.2. 

Tightness. The bound Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) = 2 is realised by the follow-ing arrival sequence on an otherwise fully-packed cluster. Suppose all nodes other than one are fully packed and the remaining node hosts a single size-4 anchor together with one size-2 anchor, leaving free space 2. A DLT job composed of three size-4 instances now arrives. Best-fit considers each arriving instance in turn. The first instance encounters free space 2 on the partial node, which does not admit a size-4 item, so a fresh node is opened and the first instance is placed there, producing a new partial node with free space 4. The second instance sees free space 2 on the original partial node and free space 4 on the just-opened node, prefers the smaller fitting capacity, and is placed onto the just-opened node, which becomes fully packed. The third instance again finds the original partial node uninhabitable for a size-4 item and the now-full node also unable to host it, so a further fresh node is opened with free space 4. The cluster now con-tains two partial nodes, one with free space 2 and one with free space 4, matching the only feasible two-partial config-uration identified in Lemma B.3 and witnessing Φ𝜋 (𝑡 ) = 2together with SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) = 2/𝑁 . This completes the proof of Proposition 3. □

## B Proofs for the Theoretical Guarantees of COMPASS-ABS 

This appendix collects the detailed proofs of the three results stated in Section 4.4, namely the unconditional state-space invariance in Proposition 1, the conditional SIF ≤ 2/𝑁 com-pactness bound in Theorem 1, and the per-operator com-plexity in Proposition 2. We keep the notation introduced in Section 4.2 for the ABS domain Σ and in Section 4.3 for the three operators Place , Remove , and Compact .

B.1 Proof of Proposition 1 (State-Space Invariance) 

We prove that every event applied by Algorithm 1 maps Σ

into Σ, so that by induction every state generated from an initial 𝜎 0 ∈ Σ remains in Σ. Since the algorithm decomposes each job-level event into a finite sequence of per-instance operator calls together with at most one Compact call, it suffices to show that each operator branch preserves Σ when applied to a state already in Σ.

Place preserves Σ. Consider an arrival 𝑖 with demand 𝑔 𝑖 

applied to 𝜎 ∈ Σ. We argue on the branches of Place .If 𝑔 𝑖 ≥ 2, the operator selects a width 𝑤 = 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) ∈ {2, 4, 8} and a host 𝑛 ★ such that either 𝑛 ★ is already slot-ted with 𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ★ ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) ≥ 𝑤 , or 𝑛 ★ was empty and is promoted to slotted with an empty profile. In the first case, appending a slot of width 𝑤 to 𝑆 (𝑛 ★) produces a new slot multiset whose total width is at most 𝐺 and whose con-stituents lie in {2, 4, 8}, hence the new 𝑆 (𝑛 ★) remains in 

SlotConf as defined in (5). In the second case, the post-event 

𝑆 (𝑛 ★) = {𝑤 } trivially lies in SlotConf . The anchor of the new slot is set to 𝑖 so that 𝑤 (𝑠 ★) = 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) = 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ★ ) ), which matches the constraint of Definition 2. The associated filler set is initialised to the up-to-𝑟 migrated 1-GPU instances with 𝑟 = 𝑤 − 𝑔 𝑖 , so that |𝐹 (𝑠 ★)| ≤ 𝑟 = 𝑤 (𝑠 ★) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ★ ) and the capacity invariant (4) holds as an inequality. Every pool node from which a filler is drawn loses one occupant and therefore preserves |𝑃 (𝑛 )| ≤ 𝐺 . No other node is touched. If 𝑔 𝑖 = 1, the operator places 𝑖 either into a slot vacancy 

(𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) +| 𝐹 (𝑠 )| < 𝑤 (𝑠 )) , or into a non-full pool node (| 𝑃 (𝑛 )| <

𝐺 ), or onto a freshly promoted pool node initialised with 

𝑃 (𝑛 ) = {𝑖 }. In the first case, |𝐹 (𝑠 )| increases by one and the new value remains bounded by 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) by the entry condition 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) + | 𝐹 (𝑠 )| < 𝑤 (𝑠 ). In the second case, |𝑃 (𝑛 )| 

increases by one and remains bounded by 𝐺 . In the third case, the new pool node has |𝑃 (𝑛 0)| = 1 ≤ 𝐺 . In all three cases the affected node remains a legal pool node or slotted node, and no slot configuration leaves SlotConf .

> 16 COMPASS-ABS

Remove preserves Σ. Consider a departure 𝑖 applied to 

𝜎 ∈ Σ.If 𝑖 is an anchor of some slot 𝑠 , the operator dissolves 

𝑠 and reinserts each filler 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 (𝑠 ) by the 1-GPU rule of 

Place . Dissolving 𝑠 removes one element from 𝑆 (𝑛 ) for the host node 𝑛 , so the new 𝑆 (𝑛 ) is a sub-multiset of the original 

𝑆 (𝑛 ) ∈ SlotConf , and any sub-multiset of a SlotConf element again lies in SlotConf . The reinsertion step has already been shown to preserve Σ in the Place argument above, applied instance-by-instance to the elements of 𝐹 (𝑠 ).If 𝑖 is a 1-GPU instance currently attached as a filler in some slot 𝑠 , the operator simply removes 𝑖 from 𝐹 (𝑠 ), which can only decrease |𝐹 (𝑠 )| and therefore preserves (4) as a strict inequality. If 𝑖 is a 1-GPU pool occupant on some pool node 

𝑛 , the operator removes 𝑖 from 𝑃 (𝑛 ), which only decreases 

|𝑃 (𝑛 )| and remains bounded by 𝐺 .

Compact preserves Σ. Migrations (𝑥, 𝑛 dst ) executed within the BestFitDrain loop are performed only when room C (𝑛 dst ) ≥ 

size (𝑥 ) holds for the current class C. Concretely, for the pool pass the destination pool node has |𝑃 (𝑛 dst )| < 𝐺 be-fore the migration, so |𝑃 (𝑛 dst )| stays at most 𝐺 after the migration. For the width-4 pass the destination slotted node has ⌊𝐷 (𝑛 dst )/ 4⌋ ≥ 1 so that 𝐷 (𝑛 dst ) ≥ 4, hence appending a width-4 slot keeps Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 dst ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) + 4 ≤ 𝐺 and the new 

𝑆 (𝑛 dst ) remains in SlotConf . The width-2 pass is analogous with the inequality 𝐷 (𝑛 dst ) ≥ 2. Migrating a slot also de-taches its filler set and reattaches it to the new host, which by the capacity invariant 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) + | 𝐹 (𝑠 )| ≤ 𝑤 (𝑠 ) on the source side remains valid on the destination side because 𝑤 (𝑠 ) does not change under migration. Every migration therefore pre-serves Σ, and so does the entire Compact call which is a finite composition of such migrations. 

Conclusion. By induction on the event sequence, every state produced by Algorithm 1 remains in Σ, which estab-lishes Proposition 1. □

B.2 Proof of Theorem 1 (Compactness under the Workload Composition Condition) 

Throughout this subsection we assume that the fraction-form Workload Composition Condition (9) stated inside The-orem 1 holds at the time 𝑡 under consideration. The argu-ment proceeds in three stages. We first translate the fraction form into a structurally more convenient slot-vacancy form (Lemma A.1), then show that this slot-vacancy form implies the saturation of every anchored fragmentation-unfriendly slot at the end of each operator call (Lemma A.2), and finally show that the three BestFitDrain passes inside Compact 

leave at most one partial node per node-type (Lemmas A.3 and A.4), which after normalisation by the cluster size 𝑁 

yields the SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2/𝑁 bound. 

Lemma A.1 (Slot-Vacancy Form of the Workload Com-position Condition). The fraction-form condition (9) is algebraically equivalent to the slot-vacancy form 

𝑛 1 (𝑡 ) ≥∑︁    

> 𝑠 :𝑎 (𝑠 )≠∅

 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 )

, (18) which asserts that the active 1-GPU population is at least as large as the total slot vacancy currently exposed by anchored fragmentation-unfriendly instances. 

Proof. By Definition 1, every active anchor 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ∈ I ≥2 has a slot width 𝑤 (𝑠 ) = 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ). Inspecting 𝑤 ★ in (3) we obtain 

𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 0 for 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ∈ { 2, 4, 8}, 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 1 for 

𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 3, 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 3 for 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 5, 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 2 for 

𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 6, and 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 1 for 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) = 7. Summing over all active anchors and grouping by demand, ∑︁    

> 𝑠 :𝑎 (𝑠 )≠∅

 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 )

 = 𝑛 3 (𝑡 ) + 3 𝑛 5 (𝑡 ) + 2 𝑛 6 (𝑡 ) + 𝑛 7 (𝑡 ).

Substituting this identity into (18) and dividing both sides by 𝑛 total (𝑡 ) > 0 yields (9), and the implication is reversible since each step is an equivalence. In what follows we use (18) interchangeably with the original form. □

Lemma A.2 (Slot Saturation under the Workload Com-position Condition). Under (18), at the end of every event handled by Algorithm 1 (whether a job arrival or a job de-parture) the capacity invariant in (4) holds with equality for every active fragmentation-unfriendly anchor, namely 

𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) + | 𝐹 (𝑠 )| = 𝑤 (𝑠 ) ∀𝑠 with 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ∈ I FUF . (19) 

Proof. By construction Place pulls 𝑤 (𝑠 ) − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) fillers from the pool whenever a fragmentation-unfriendly anchor is installed, and Remove in the 1-GPU branch additionally mi-grates one replacement filler from the pool whenever a filler departs from a slot. Both operators therefore actively main-tain the saturation equality (19) as long as the pool popula-tion is non-empty. The only obstacle is filler shortage at the moment when fillers are being drawn, and the slot-vacancy form (18) guarantees that the total active 1-GPU popula-tion 𝑛 1 (𝑡 ) is at least the total slot vacancy aggregated across all anchored fragmentation-unfriendly instances at the end of the event. Since Compact does not create new slot va-cancy and the 1-GPU pool is internally redistributed across pool nodes without changing 𝑛 1 (𝑡 ), (18) carries through to the post-Compact state. Because Algorithm 1 now invokes 

Compact at the end of both arrival and departure branches, every event terminates in a post-Compact state, and the equality (19) therefore holds at the end of every event. □

Lemma A.3 (Pool Pass Compactness). After the pool pass of Compact , at most one pool node is non-fully-packed. 

Proof. The pool pass instantiates BestFitDrain policy with count pool (𝑛 ) = |𝑃 (𝑛 )| , cap pool (𝑛 ) = 𝐺 , and room pool (𝑛 ) =

𝐺 − | 𝑃 (𝑛 )| , and the set of partial hosts is N = {𝑛 : 0 <

|𝑃 (𝑛 )| < 𝐺 }. Each iteration picks the head of N as 𝑛 src ,the node with the largest remaining room. The drain loop 

> 17 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

selects, for each 1-GPU item 𝑥 on 𝑛 src , the eligible destination with the smallest room room pool (𝑛 dst ) ≥ 1 and migrates 𝑥 

there. Each migration strictly increases |𝑃 (𝑛 dst )| and strictly decreases |𝑃 (𝑛 src )| .The loop terminates either when |N | ≤ 1 or when no progress is made during an iteration. Suppose for contradic-tion that termination occurs with |N | ≥ 2 and no progress in the last iteration. “No progress” means that for every 𝑥 on 

𝑛 src the eligible set S = {𝑛 ∈ N \ { 𝑛 src } : room pool (𝑛 ) ≥ 1} is empty. But |N | ≥ 2 implies the existence of at least one 𝑛 ′ ∈N \ { 𝑛 src } with |𝑃 (𝑛 ′)| < 𝐺 , equivalently room pool (𝑛 ′) ≥ 1, so 𝑛 ′ ∈ S , a contradiction. Therefore termination implies 

|N | ≤ 1, which is exactly the claim that at most one pool node is non-fully-packed. □

Lemma A.4 (Slotted Compactness). After the width-4 and width-2 passes of Compact , and under the slot saturation guaranteed by Lemma A.2, at most one slotted node is non-fully-packed. 

Proof. Under Lemma A.2 every active slot is internally sat-urated, so a slotted node 𝑛 is non-fully-packed if and only if 𝐷 (𝑛 ) = 𝐺 − Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) > 0, i.e. the node has unpro-filed residual capacity. Possible values of Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) are subsums of multisets drawn from {2, 4, 8} bounded above by 𝐺 = 8, so a fully-packed slotted node has Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) = 8achieved by one of the multisets {8}, {4, 4}, {4, 2, 2}, {2, 2, 2, 2},while a non-fully-packed slotted node has Í𝑠 ∈𝑆 (𝑛 ) 𝑤 (𝑠 ) ≤ 6achieved by one of {2}, {4}, {2, 2}, {4, 2}, {2, 2, 2}.The width-4 pass treats anchored width-4 slots as items and slotted nodes as hosts, with count w4 (𝑛 ) counting width-4 anchored slots in 𝑆 (𝑛 ) and room w4 (𝑛 ) = ⌊𝐷 (𝑛 )/ 4⌋. Re-peating the contradiction argument of Lemma A.3 with the width-4 class, if the width-4 pass terminates with two or more nodes still satisfying 0 < count w4 (𝑛 ) < cap w4 (𝑛 ) and with positive room on at least one of them, then the head source has an eligible destination and the loop must per-form a migration, contradicting the no-progress termination condition. The pass therefore terminates with at most one slotted node in the width-4 partial set. After the width-4 pass, consider the remaining partial slotted nodes. Each such node either has no width-4 slot at all, or it is the unique node left in the width-4 partial set. The first sub-population is then processed by the width-2 pass under the same argument applied to the width-2 class. The same no-progress contradiction shows that the width-2 pass terminates with at most one node in the width-2 partial set. It remains to argue that the survivor of the width-4 pass and the survivor of the width-2 pass can be taken to be the same node. Suppose the width-4 pass leaves a single par-tial node 𝑛 (4) and the width-2 pass leaves a single partial node 𝑛 (2) ≠ 𝑛 (4) . The node 𝑛 (4) contains a single width-4 anchored slot and has 𝐷 (𝑛 (4) ) ∈ { 0, 2} from the multiset enumeration above. If 𝐷 (𝑛 (4) ) = 0 then 𝑛 (4) is fully-packed, contradicting its membership in the partial set; therefore 

𝐷 (𝑛 (4) ) = 2, which means 𝑆 (𝑛 (4) ) = {4}, because {4, 2} al-ready exhausts the width-2 room and {4, 4} is fully-packed. But then room w2 (𝑛 (4) ) = ⌊2/2⌋ = 1 ≥ 1, so 𝑛 (4) is a width-2-eligible destination that can absorb any width-2 slot present on 𝑛 (2) . The width-2 pass would therefore have made a migra-tion from 𝑛 (2) to 𝑛 (4) , contradicting the assumption that the width-2 pass left 𝑛 (2) ≠ 𝑛 (4) . We conclude that the survivor sets of the two passes coincide, hence at most one slotted node remains partial after the entire Compact call. □

Concluding the proof of Theorem 1. Combining Lem-mas A.3 and A.4, immediately after every Compact invoca-tion performed by Algorithm 1 under the Workload Compo-sition Condition (9), at most one pool node and at most one slotted node are non-fully-packed, so at most two non-empty nodes in the cluster carry unused GPU capacity. Because Algorithm 1 invokes Compact in both the arrival branch and the departure branch, every event handled by the algo-rithm terminates in a state that satisfies this two-partial-node bound. The cluster state changes only at event boundaries, so the bound extends from every event boundary to every continuous time instant between consecutive events; that is, the two-partial-node bound holds for all 𝑡 ≥ 0. It remains to translate this combinatorial bound into the Scheduler-Induced Fragmentation metric of Section 3. Re-call that 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) denotes the proportion of partial nodes in the cluster state produced by policy 𝜋 , that 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) ≥ 0 de-notes the inherent partial-node proportion attainable by any feasible packing of the active demand I ( 𝑡 ), and that SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) := 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) − 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ). Dividing the partial-node count by the cluster size 𝑁 converts the two-partial-node bound into 

𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2/𝑁 for all 𝑡 ≥ 0, and the non-negativity of 𝐹 ★(𝑡 )

then gives SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ) = 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) − 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) ≤ 𝐹 𝜋 (𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝑁 ∀ 𝑡 ≥ 0.

This completes the proof of Theorem 1. □

B.3 Proof of Proposition 2 (Operational Complexity) 

We bound the per-operator running time under the standard assumption that the slot index, the pool index, and the empty-node index are maintained as balanced search trees keyed by the relevant priority. The bookkeeping cost of incremen-tal index maintenance is absorbed into the operator-level bounds below. 

Place is 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ). The multi-GPU branch performs three operations on the slotted-node index: a candidate query for the smallest remaining capacity above the threshold 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ),an insertion of a new slot record, and at most 𝑤 ★(𝑔 𝑖 ) − 𝑔 𝑖 ≤ 6filler-draw operations from the pool index. Each of these operations runs in 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) on a balanced search tree of 𝑁 

entries, and the constant number of filler draws contributes only an 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) overhead. The 1-GPU branch performs 

> 18 COMPASS-ABS

one priority query for an open slot vacancy or a non-full pool node, again at 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) cost. Therefore T ( Place ) =

𝑂 (log 𝑁 ).

Remove is 𝑂 (1). If 𝑖 is a 1-GPU occupant, the operator detaches 𝑖 from its current container in 𝑂 (1) time by fol-lowing the parent pointer maintained in the slot or pool index. If 𝑖 is an anchor of slot 𝑠 , the operator dissolves 𝑠 in 

𝑂 (1) time and reinserts each of the |𝐹 (𝑠 )| ≤ 6 fillers by the 1-GPU rule of Place , each at 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) cost. Since |𝐹 (𝑠 )| is bounded by the constant 𝐺 − 𝑔 𝑎 (𝑠 ) ≤ 6, the total work of an anchor departure is dominated by a constant number of 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) filler reinsertions, so the local handler cost is 

𝑂 (1) when the filler reinsertions are charged to the subse-quent Compact pass that already runs in 𝑂 (𝑁 ). We therefore report T ( Remove ) = 𝑂 (1) for the local edit. 

Compact is 𝑂 (𝑁 ). A single pass of BestFitDrain visits each partial host at most once as 𝑛 src in the outer loop, and inside the loop it performs at most count C (𝑛 src ) ≤ 𝐺 item migrations, each at 𝑂 (log 𝑁 ) cost. The total work per class is therefore 𝑂 (𝑁 log 𝑁 ), and aggregating across the three classes (pool, w4, w2) gives the same asymptotic bound. With a slightly tighter amortised analysis that charges each migra-tion to the destination node whose room strictly decreases as a result, the log 𝑁 factor collapses to 𝑂 (𝑁 ) total, matching the bound stated in the proposition. □

## C Algorithm for Computing Φ★(𝑡 ) and 𝐹 ★(𝑡 )

The inherent fragmentation defined in Section 3.2 is 

𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) = Φ★(𝑡 )

𝑁 , Φ★(𝑡 ) := min   

> 𝑃 feasible

𝜈 (𝑃 ),

where 𝜈 (𝑃 ) is the number of partial nodes in a feasible pack-ing 𝑃 of the instantaneous instance multiset I ( 𝑡 ) and Φ★(𝑡 )

is the minimum partial-node count attainable across all such packings. Throughout this appendix the algorithm computes the integer-valued Φ★(𝑡 ), from which 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) follows by the single division by the cluster size 𝑁 . Evaluating Φ★(𝑡 ) via a general bin-packing solver is already expensive on a single time slice and prohibitive on a trace-long evaluation. The structural analysis carried out in Section 4 for COMPASS-ABS, however, supplies enough structure to compute Φ★(𝑡 )

either in closed form or by a small residual ILP. We describe the algorithm in this appendix and then use it as the oracle scheduler SIFOpt in the empirical evaluation of Section 5. 

C.1 Key observation: reduing to power-of-two items 

Each fragmentation-unfriendly instance 𝑔 ∈ I FUF can be combined with strictly smaller active instances into a com-posite block whose total GPU count falls in {4, 8}, namely 

𝑔 = 3 : 3 + 1 = 4,𝑔 = 5 : 5 + 3 = 8 or 5 + 2 + 1 = 8 or 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 8,𝑔 = 6 : 6 + 2 = 8 or 6 + 1 + 1 = 8,𝑔 = 7 : 7 + 1 = 8.

If every active FUF instance is paired into such a composite, the remaining item population consists of composites of size 

{4, 8}, original IFF instances of size {2, 4, 8}, and any 1-GPU instances not consumed as fillers, so the multiset of item sizes is contained in {1, 2, 4, 8}. The Workload Composition Condition (9) stated in Theorem 1 is exactly the algebraic condition under which the active 1-GPU population is suf-ficient to complete this pairing for every FUF instance, so under that condition the reduction to a power-of-two item multiset always succeeds. 

C.2 Closed form solution under the Workload Composition Condition 

When all item sizes lie in {1, 2, 4, 8}, packing into bins with ca-pacity 𝐺 = 8 admits an trivial optimum: a Best-Fit-Decreasing pass that processes items in the order 8 → 4 → 2 → 1 al-ways closes one bin per multiple of 𝐺 and leaves at most one partial bin whose load equals 𝑇 (𝑡 ) mod 𝐺 , where 

𝑇 (𝑡 ) :=

> 8

∑︁ 

> 𝑔 =1

𝑔 · 𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 ) (20) denotes the total active GPU demand at time 𝑡 . This is be-cause every two width-4 items pack into a single full bin, every four width-2 items pack into a single full bin, every eight width-1 items pack into a single full bin, and any resid-ual mixture below capacity 𝐺 collapses into a single tail bin by the nested-power-of-two structure. The number of partial bins in the optimal packing is therefore 

Φ★(𝑡 ) = ⊮𝑇 (𝑡 ) . 0 (mod 𝐺 ) =

(

0, 𝑇 (𝑡 ) mod 𝐺 = 0,

1, otherwise, (21) 

𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) = Φ★(𝑡 )/ 𝑁 ∈ { 0, 1/𝑁 }. In other words, under the condition the inherent fragmentation floor never exceeds a single node: at most one bin carries unavoidable residue 

𝑇 (𝑡 ) mod 𝐺 , and every partial node beyond that one is there-fore scheduler-induced and accounted for by SIF 𝜋 (𝑡 ). Both cases of (21) are tight and achievable by the explicit Best-Fit-Decreasing placement described below. 

> 19 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

C.3 Residual ILP when the Workload Composition Condition fails 

When (9) fails, the active 1-GPU population is short by 

𝛿 (𝑡 ) :=  𝑛 3 + 3𝑛 5 + 2𝑛 6 + 𝑛 7

 − 𝑛 1 relative to the filler de-mand of the FUF anchors. After the greedy combining stage exhausts the 1-GPU supply, exactly 𝛿 (𝑡 ) units of FUF slot vacancy remain unfilled, equivalently a small residual subset 

𝑈 (𝑡 ) ⊆ I FUF of FUF instances enter the placement stage still carrying their original size in {3, 5, 6, 7}. The item multiset is therefore no longer contained in {1, 2, 4, 8}, and the closed form (21) no longer applies. In that case we restrict the optimization to 𝑈 (𝑡 ): we first place all power-of-two items via Best-Fit-Decreasing as in the closed-form case, then run an integer linear program that places the residual FUF instances on top of the resulting state and minimises the total partial-node count. The size of this ILP is governed by |𝑈 (𝑡 )| rather than 𝑛 total (𝑡 ), and 

|𝑈 (𝑡 )| is in turn bounded by 𝛿 (𝑡 ), which is empirically a small constant on production traces because the Workload Composition Condition holds during the overwhelming ma-jority of evaluated time slices and fails only briefly during transient mixture shifts. 

C.4 Algorithm summary 

We now state the procedure explicitly. The inputs are the active instance counts 𝑛 1 (𝑡 ), . . . , 𝑛 8 (𝑡 ) at time 𝑡 ; the out-puts are the optimal partial-node count Φ★(𝑡 ) and a witness packing 𝑃 ★(𝑡 ) realising it (which the SIFOpt oracle sched-uler uses as its target placement). The normalised inherent fragmentation 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) used in Section 3.2 is then obtained as 

𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) = Φ★(𝑡 )/ 𝑁 .

Logic of the procedure. The algorithm proceeds in two stages that mirror the structural analysis of Section 4. The 

combining stage (lines 3–6) absorbs every fragmentation-unfriendly instance into a composite block of size {4, 8} by pairing it with strictly smaller active instances. Combining priorities are chosen so as to consume the smallest number of 1-GPU instances first when the fragmentation-unfriendly size already has a natural partner of non-unit size in the active set (e.g., 5 + 3 before 5 + 1 + 1 + 1); the priority or-der does not affect Φ★(𝑡 ) as long as combining succeeds for all FUF instances, because the resulting power-of-two item multiset has the same total 𝑇 (𝑡 ) and Best-Fit-Decreasing on a power-of-two item set always attains the bin-count lower bound ⌈𝑇 (𝑡 )/ 𝐺 ⌉. The placement stage (line 7) then runs Best-Fit-Decreasing in the order 8 → 4 → 2 → 1 and materialises this lower bound. Under the Workload Compo-sition Condition, the closed form (21) reads off the partial-node count directly from 𝑇 (𝑡 ) mod 𝐺 without ever inspect-ing the placement, but the placement is still produced as a witness so that the SIFOpt oracle scheduler has a concrete target to migrate towards in its evaluation runs. When the condition fails, the residual ILP at lines 12–13 handles the small subset of FUF instances that the combining stage could not pair, and the size of that ILP is bounded by the deficit 

𝛿 (𝑡 ) = (𝑛 3 + 3𝑛 5 + 2𝑛 6 + 𝑛 7) − 𝑛 1 rather than by the cluster size, so the procedure remains tractable on production traces even when (9) is momentarily violated. 

Complexity. The combining stage scans the instance mul-tiset once at 𝑂 (𝑛 total (𝑡 )) cost. The Best-Fit-Decreasing place-ment runs in 𝑂 (𝑛 total (𝑡 ) log 𝑛 total (𝑡 )) with a balanced search tree keyed by bin remaining capacity, and degenerates to 

𝑂 (𝑛 total (𝑡 )) for the power-of-two item set because each item closes exactly one bin position. Whenever (9) holds, the closed-form return at line 8 short-circuits the placement step for the purpose of reporting Φ★(𝑡 ), so the dominant cost is the linear-time combining and the optional witness material-isation. When (9) fails, the residual ILP at line 12 runs on at most 𝛿 (𝑡 ) ≤ | 𝑈 (𝑡 )| variables and remains millisecond-scale on production traces with 𝛿 (𝑡 ) of the order of tens. 

Algorithm 2 Computing Φ★(𝑡 ) and the SIFOpt placement witness; 𝐹 ★(𝑡 ) = Φ★(𝑡 )/ 𝑁 .                                                                                                                                         

> Input: active instance counts 𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 )for 𝑔 =1, . . . , 8
> Output: Φ★(𝑡 ) ∈ Z≥0together with a witness packing 𝑃 ★(𝑡 )
> (and 𝐹 ★(𝑡 )=Φ★(𝑡 )/ 𝑁 )1: 𝑇 ←Í8
> 𝑔 =1𝑔 ·𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 )
> 2: if 𝑛 1(𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑛 3(𝑡 ) + 3𝑛 5(𝑡 ) + 2𝑛 6(𝑡 ) + 𝑛 7(𝑡 )then (WCC holds)
> 3: for each 𝑖 ∈ I =5(𝑡 )do pair 𝑖 with one I=3instance if available, else with I=2+ I =1, else with three I=1instances
> (form an 8-composite)
> 4: for each 𝑖 ∈ I =6(𝑡 )do pair 𝑖 with one I=2if available, else with two I=1(form an 8-composite)
> 5: for each 𝑖 ∈ I =7(𝑡 )do pair 𝑖 with one I=1(form an 8-composite)
> 6: for each 𝑖 ∈ I =3(𝑡 )not consumed in line 3 do pair 𝑖 with one I=1(form a 4-composite)
> 7: run Best-Fit-Decreasing over the resulting items (sizes in
> {1,2,4,8}) into bins of capacity 𝐺 to obtain 𝑃 ★(𝑡 )
> 8: return  ⊮[𝑇 mod 𝐺 ≠0], 𝑃 ★(𝑡 )
> 9: else (WCC fails; small residual subset of FUF instances cannot pair)
> 10: greedily perform lines 3–6 until the 1-GPU pool is ex-hausted; collect unpaired FUF instances into 𝑈 (𝑡 )
> 11: run Best-Fit-Decreasing over the paired items into a ten-tative packing 𝑃 0
> 12: solve the integer program min
> 𝑥 ∈Z|𝑈 (𝑡 ) |× 𝑀
> ≥0
> 𝜈 (𝑃 0⊕𝑥 )
> s.t. 𝑥 places each instance in 𝑈 (𝑡 )into one bin of 𝑃 0
> or into a new bin where 𝑀 is the bin index space and 𝜈 counts partial bins 13: return  𝜈 (𝑃 0⊕𝑥 ★), 𝑃 0⊕𝑥 ★
> 20 COMPASS-ABS

## D Extension to Multi-Panel NVLink Communication Domains 

The COMPASS-ABS design developed in Section 4 hardwires the per-node GPU count at 𝐺 = 8 together with the slot widths {2, 4, 8}, both of which trace back to the DGX-1 / HGX baseboard abstraction in which a single node forms one NVLink communication domain. Recent NVIDIA platforms such as NVL72 and the projected NVL576 extend the high-bandwidth NVLink fabric across multiple baseboards inside a single rack-scale assembly, so that the basic intra-instance communication domain now contains 𝐺 dom GPUs with 𝐺 dom 

no longer equal to 8. Throughout this appendix we assume only that 

𝐺 dom = 𝐺 𝑝 · 𝐾, 𝐺 𝑝 = 8, 𝐾 ∈ Z≥1, (22) namely that each NVLink communication domain comprises exactly 𝐾 baseboards of 𝐺 𝑝 = 8 GPUs each. The original DGX-1 / HGX system corresponds to 𝐾 = 1, NVL72 corre-sponds to 𝐾 = 9, and a hypothetical NVL576 corresponds to 

𝐾 = 72 if treated as a single flat domain or 𝐾 = 8 if treated as eight NVL72 sub-domains. The structural fact we exploit is that the 8-GPU baseboard survives across all of these platforms as the basic hardware building block ; only the number of baseboards that sit inside a single NVLink domain varies. We refer to a 𝐺 𝑝 = 8 baseboard as a panel throughout this appendix. Workloads on a multi-panel NVLink domain now admit two qualitatively different instance classes: 

• Sub-panel instances with 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 8} that fit within one panel, exactly as in the original setting; and 

• Multi-panel instances with 𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 16 , 24 , 32 , 40 , 48 , 56 ,

64 , . . . , 𝐺 dom } that span multiple panels in the same NVLink domain through the rack-scale NVLink fabric. The within-panel intra-instance constraint of Section 2.2 is replaced by an intra-domain constraint: every GPU assigned to a single instance must lie in the same NVLink domain. Sub-panel instances satisfy this trivially; multi-panel instances exercise it. 

D.1 Hierarchical Anchor-Based Space 

We extend COMPASS-ABS to a two-level scheduler that runs the original within-panel policy on each panel and a structurally identical panel-level analogue across panels within each NVLink domain. The panel-level state space 

Σpanel mirrors the ABS construction of Section 4.2 verbatim under two substitutions: the panel replaces the GPU as the atomic placement unit, and the domain capacity 𝐾 replaces the node capacity 𝐺 = 8. A multi-panel instance of demand 

𝑔 𝑖 has panel demand 𝑝 𝑖 := 𝑔 𝑖 /𝐺 𝑝 ∈ { 2, 3, . . . } and is anchored in a panel-slot of width 𝑤 ★ 

> 𝑝

(𝑝 𝑖 ) ∈ { 2, 4, 8} panels: 

𝑤 ★ 

> 𝑝

(𝑝 ) =



2, 𝑝 = 2,

4, 𝑝 ∈ { 3, 4},

8, 𝑝 ∈ { 5, 6, 7, 8}.

(23) Multi-panel instances with 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ { 2, 4, 8} are called panel-fragmentation-friendly (panel-FF); those with 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ { 3, 5, 6, 7}

are panel-fragmentation-unfriendly (panel-FUF). A 1-panel instance, namely a 𝑔 𝑖 = 𝐺 𝑝 = 8 instance that fully occupies one baseboard, plays at the panel level the role that a 1-GPU instance plays at the GPU level inside a panel: it can either saturate a panel-vacancy in an anchored panel-FUF panel-slot, or sit in a panel-pool reserved for panel-level fillers. The full cluster-wide state space is the Cartesian product across NVLink domains of Σpanel , with the internal state of each non-saturated panel still drawn from the GPU-level Σ of Section 4.2. We call the resulting two-level state space the 

hierarchical ABS and denote it by Σhier .

D.2 Hierarchical Workload Composition Condition 

The Workload Composition Condition (9) of Theorem 1 ex-tends to the two-level setting by imposing one condition per level. Let 𝑛 𝑔 (𝑡 ) denote the count of active sub-panel instances of GPU demand 𝑔 ∈ { 1, . . . , 8} at time 𝑡 , and let 𝑛 (panel ) 

> 𝑝

(𝑡 )

denote the count of active multi-panel instances of panel de-mand 𝑝 ∈ { 2, 3, . . . }. The GPU-level condition stays identical to (9), namely 

𝑛 1 (𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑛 3 (𝑡 ) + 3𝑛 5 (𝑡 ) + 2𝑛 6 (𝑡 ) + 𝑛 7 (𝑡 ), (24) and the panel-level condition takes the structurally identical form 

𝑛 8 (𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑛 (panel ) 

> 3

(𝑡 ) + 3𝑛 (panel ) 

> 5

(𝑡 ) + 2𝑛 (panel ) 

> 6

(𝑡 ) + 𝑛 (panel ) 

> 7

(𝑡 ),

(25) where the left-hand side is the active count of 𝑔 𝑖 = 8 in-stances, treated as 1-panel fillers at the panel level. Equa-tion (25) is obtained from (24) by the substitution 1-GPU ↦ →

1-panel together with the analogue of the slot-vacancy form (18) at panel granularity, and uses the same coefficient pat-tern {1, 3, 2, 1} for the same algebraic reason as in Lemma A.1. 

D.3 Hierarchical COMPASS algorithm 

The extended scheduler adopts two structurally identical 

Place /Remove /Compact pipelines, one per level, dispatched according to the demand class of the arriving or departing instance: 

• Sub-panel events (𝑔 𝑖 ≤ 8): handled by the GPU-level COMPASS-ABS of Section 4.3 acting on the host panel. 

• Multi-panel events (𝑔 𝑖 ∈ { 16 , 24 , . . . , 𝐺 dom − 𝐺 𝑝 }): handled by the panel-level analogue acting on the host NVLink domain, with 𝑔 𝑖 = 8 instances serving as panel-fillers. 

> 21 Yukai Zhou and Hongfan Wu

• Domain-filling events (𝑔 𝑖 = 𝐺 dom ): occupy an entire NVLink domain at once and are treated as a width-𝐾 

degenerate panel-slot. Algorithm 1 is invoked at both levels and each Compact 

pass runs over the BestFitDrain classes for its level. At the GPU level the three classes remain {pool , w4, w2 } on capac-ity 𝐺 𝑝 = 8; at the panel level they become {panel-pool ,

panel-w 4, panel-w 2 } on capacity 𝐾 . Because the two levels act on disjoint populations of items, the two compaction passes do not interfere and run independently after each event. 

D.4 Hierarchical compactness guarantee 

The compactness guarantee of Theorem 1 lifts to the hierar-chical setting in a structurally identical form. 

Theorem 2 (Hierarchical Compactness) . Assume that the GPU-level Workload Composition Condition (24) and the panel-level Workload Composition Condition (25) both hold at every 

𝑡 ≥ 0. Then in every cluster state produced by the hierarchical COMPASS-ABS scheduler: 1. across the entire cluster, at most one panel-resident slot-ted GPU-region and at most one panel-resident GPU-pool region are non-fully-packed; and 2. within each NVLink domain that hosts at least one multi-panel anchor, at most one panel-slot region and at most one panel-pool region are non-fully-packed. Consequently, after normalising the partial-region count at each level by the corresponding domain size, the GPU-level and panel-level scheduler-induced fragmentation measures satisfy 

SIF 𝜋  

> GPU

(𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝑁 p

(cluster-wide, 𝑁 p panels) ,

SIF 𝜋  

> panel

(𝑡 ) ≤ 2

𝐾 (per NVLink domain of 𝐾 panels) ,

(26) 

for all 𝑡 ≥ 0.Proof sketch. The argument reduces to two independent in-vocations of the proof of Theorem 1 given in Appendix B.2, one on the GPU-level state inside each panel and one on the panel-level state inside each NVLink domain. Both invoca-tions are valid because Lemmas A.1–A.4 of Appendix B.2 depend only on (i) the power-of-two slot widths {2, 4, 8}

being a valid sub-decomposition of the local capacity, (ii) the anchor-filler invariant under the friendly/unfriendly di-chotomy of (23), and (iii) the class structure {pool , w4, w2 }

on which BestFitDrain operates, all of which are preserved under the substitution 𝐺 → 𝐾 and 1-GPU → 1-panel at the panel level. □

D.5 Generality with respect to the domain panel count 

Theorem 2 is stated for an arbitrary positive integer 𝐾 , with-out assuming that 𝐾 is a power of two. The panel-level BestFitDrain operates on class set {panel-pool , panel-w 4,

panel-w 2 } exactly as the GPU-level pass operates on its own class set, and the combinatorial argument of Lemma A.4 does not depend on 𝐺 taking any particular value beyond requiring that the slot widths {2, 4, 8} remain a valid sub-decomposition of the capacity. For the NVL72 instantiation with 𝐾 = 9, any panel-level layout decomposes into at most one width-8 panel-slot together with one residual panel act-ing as a panel-pool, which is the structural reason the 9-panel layout fits cleanly into the existing framework despite 𝐾 = 9not being a power of two: the lone residual panel coincides exactly with the panel-pool slot that the framework already requires. The same hierarchical scheduler and the same com-pactness bound apply to every multi-panel platform whose NVLink domain comprises an integer number of 8-GPU base-boards, including the original DGX-1 / HGX system ( 𝐾 = 1, in which the panel level is trivially empty), DGX-2 and Su-perPod intermediate systems ( 𝐾 = 2), the NVL72 system (𝐾 = 9), and the projected NVL576 system ( 𝐾 = 72 flat, or 

𝐾 = 8 across NVL72 sub-domains as a third tier). In summary, as long as the NVLink domain contains an integer multiple of 𝐺 𝑝 = 8 GPUs, the hierarchical COMPASS-ABS scheduler remains valid and the SIF bound (26) continues to hold.