Title: FedJigsaw: Multi-Agent Collaborative Model Reassembly for Decentralized Heterogeneous Federated Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.01861v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 02:29:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 

# FED JIGSAW : M ULTI -A GENT COLLABORATIVE MODEL 

# REASSEMBLY FOR DECENTRALIZED HETEROGENEOUS 

# FEDERATED LEARNING 

Jifeng Chen, Haibo Zhang, Yawen Chen 

School of System & Computing University of New South Wales Canberra ACT 2600 Australia 

{jifeng.chen, haibo.zhang, wendy.chen1 }@unsw.edu.au 

## ABSTRACT 

Model Heterogeneous Federated Learning (MHFL) addresses client-level resource heterogeneity by allowing each participant to train a personalized model architec-ture under a shared training objective. A prevalent paradigm, Partial Training (PT), achieves this by allowing each client to train a subnetwork of the global model. However, existing PT methods typically rely on predefined architectural templates or over-parameterized supernets, limiting fine-grained personalization and impos-ing substantial computational and memory overhead. We propose FedJigsaw ,a novel framework that reshapes model personalization as a dynamic and decen-tralized model assembly problem. Instead of selecting subnetworks from a pre-defined supernetwork, each client constructs its model by assembling reusable modules learned from neighboring clients. At the client level, we introduce 

AttenAssemble to enable each participant to adaptively construct a tailored model based on local observations. To support efficient knowledge sharing under communication and privacy constraints, we design SymbioArchitect , a mech-anism that allows clients to exchange granular model modules with their topological neighbors. To mitigate training instability introduced by decentralized module exchange, we design CoRe-Tune , an attention-enhanced centralized training with a decentralized execution strategy, which guides local policies to foster implicit collaboration and stabilize training dynamics, without compromising data privacy. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that FedJigsaw outperforms state-of-the-art MHFL baselines by up to 13.8% in relative accuracy while significantly shrinking cross-client performance variance, but also slashes decision-making latency and peak memory footprint compared to existing policy-driven methods. Ablation studies show that dynamic modular composition is more effective and efficient than supernet-based partial training under heterogeneous settings. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged for collaborative model training while preserving data privacy. However, when deploying FL into real-life scenarios, it inevitably encounters data, computational, and communicational heterogeneity (Lim et al., 2020). Early efforts (Xu et al., 2023; Tastan et al., 2024; Li et al., 2021) primarily focused on maintaining personalized parameters or customized aggregating weights. While early efforts are effective for data heterogeneity, computational heterogeneity is overlooked. Essentially, no weight tuning can magically enable a resource-constrained microcontroller to infer a ResNet-50 model in an FL system. To bridge this gap, Model Heterogeneous Federated Learning (MHFL) has been proposed. Despite recent advances, current mainstream MHFL methodologies remain fundamentally bottlenecked by the following three main aspects: • Heuristic-driven Inflexibility: Existing methods(Alam et al., 2022; Horvath et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2024) typically rely on static sub-networks extracted to a few discrete predefined capability 1arXiv:2608.01861v1 [cs.DC] 3 Aug 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 levels. Consequently, they fail to customize architectures for individual client capacities and preclude true architectural diversity by strictly requiring a unified backbone. • Resource-prohibitive overhead: Another MHFL branch leverages Knowledge Distillation (KD)(Wang et al., 2023b; Yi et al., 2024). However, these methods require clients to maintain an auxiliary homogeneous or teacher model alongside the local model, which inherently doubles the local memory and computational overhead, making them impractical for resource-constrained edge devices. • Privacy-intrusive centralization: Several MHFL approaches (Lin et al., 2020; Li & Wang, 2019) rely on public datasets as a shared reference medium for feature alignment and knowledge transfer. Although this strategy facilitates global consensus, it inevitably introduces massive computational overhead. More critically, sharing inference results on public data reintroduces severe privacy vulnerabilities, fundamentally contradicting the premise of FL. 

Motivation & Core Challenges Motivated by these limitations, an ideal MHFL paradigm should empower each client to dynamically and autonomously assemble a customized architecture tailored to its unique context. Furthermore, the architectural decision-making processes must be fully decentralized. By relying on local agents rather than centralized public datasets or extensive server-side coordination, such a paradigm inherently mitigates privacy risks and minimizes deployment costs. Realizing this motivation, however, poses three core challenges: • C1: Efficient Context-Aware Architecture Generation: Traditional Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is computationally expensive and requires iterative evaluations, making it challenging for real-time execution or on resource-constrained edge devices. Achieving rapid, context-aware model generation, where a client can direct the ”assembly” of a customized model with low inference latency from its local data features, remains a critical hurdle. • C2: Structural Knowledge Sharing Beyond Parameters: Conventional FL systems facilitate knowledge sharing strictly through the aggregation of model parameters. In an MHFL environment, client model backbones may also diverge; this parameter-level communication completely breaks down. In a decentralized MHFL environment, how to break this physical isolation and establish a collaborative scheme for sharing structural blocks becomes a fundamental problem. • C3: Stable and Efficient Optimization: To realize dynamic assembly, each client is inherently modeled as an autonomous learning agent. However, in a multi-agent environment, as individual agents continuously update their architectural policies, environmental feedback becomes severely non-stationary from the perspective of any single agent, forming a non-cooperative game. Thus, the guidance of training for this system is necessary and challenging. 

Contributions To address these challenges, we propose FedJigsaw , a novel framework for Multi-Agent collaborative reassembly in MHFL. By formulating the problem as a Multi-Agent Reinforce-ment Learning (MARL) paradigm, each client possesses an agent , which dynamically reassembles neural networks block by block locally, similar to solving a jigsaw puzzle. • Solution to C1: To address C1, we propose the AttenAssemble paradigm. Unlike costly global supernet searches in NAS, we formulate model assembly as a sequential decision-making process. Powered by an attention-based pointer network, this paradigm rapidly identifies the correlations between candidate actions and the current state, and dynamically selects the optimal modules. • Solution to C2: To address C2, we design the SymbioArchitect scheme to enable knowledge transfer across heterogenenous models. Instead of exchanging full models, clients collaboratively fetch specific neural modules from their neighbors guided by lightweight metadata. Consequently, this not only elevates knowledge to a structural level but also drastically reduces communication overhead by transmitting only the necessary components. • Solution to C3: To address C3, we introduce the CoRe-Tune strategy to mitigate non-stationarity caused by the MARL non-cooperative game. Utilizing an attention-enhanced Centralized Training Decentralized Execution (CTDE) framework, a global ServerCritic leverages its global vision to explicitly guide local policy training. Once transitioned to decentralized execution, the server is entirely decoupled. This guarantees that clients’ decision-making remains physically independent, yet achieves profound implicit collaboration. 2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 

## 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 

Knowledge Distillation and Mutual Learning in MHFL To address the model-heterogeneity challenge in MHFL, a significant line of research leverages KD and Mutual Learning to transfer knowledge via a global sharing model and a local heterogeneous model, then uses parameters to propagate knowledge. Methods such as FedDF (Lin et al., 2020) and FedMD (Li & Wang, 2019) rely on a public dataset as a shared reference and exchange logits to reach global consensus. Alternatively, approaches such as pFedKnow (Wang et al., 2023b) and FedMRL (Yi et al., 2024) utilize pre-trained large models or enforce representational alignment between local heterogeneous models and a shared homogeneous model. However, these techniques suffer from two main limitations. First, KD-based approaches inherently require clients to maintain an extra auxiliary or teacher model, imposing prohibitive computational and memory overheads on resource-constrained edge devices(Lim et al., 2020). Secondly, relying on public datasets for feature alignment introduces both massive inference complexity and severe privacy vulnerabilities. Consequently, these limitations render such a paradigm fundamentally impractical for resource-constrained environments. 

Partial Training in MHFL Another branch achieves heterogeneity through partial training or sub-network extraction (Wen et al., 2022). Frameworks such as HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021), FjORD (Horvath et al., 2021), FlexFL (Chen et al., 2024) extract static sub-networks based on discrete, predefined capability levels. Similarly, FedRolex (Alam et al., 2022) introduces a rolling submodel extraction scheme to evenly train the global model. Based on that, FedShapleX (Chen et al., 2025) uses Shapley value to achieve a fair and context-aware submodel extraction. Although these methods have effectively reduced the computation overhead, they strictly require all clients to share a unified global supernet, precluding true architectural diversity. Furthermore, these coarse-grained extractions fail to customize architectures to individual dynamic capacities. Crucially, blind truncation of rolling layers disrupts strict mathematical alignments (e.g., residual connections), leading to semantic misalignment and performance degradation. 

Federated Neural Architecture Search To achieve true structural personalization, recent efforts have integrated Neural Architecture Search (NAS) into FL. FedNAS (He et al., 2020) jointly optimizes model weights and architecture parameters within a massive supernet, but suffers from severe communication bottlenecks. pFedHR (Wang et al., 2023a) attempts heterogeneous model reassembly (Yang et al., 2022), yet introduces unacceptable computational complexity during candidate model matching and heavily relies on the public dataset. More recently, RL-based FedNAS approaches such as PerFedRLNAS(Yao & Li, 2024) and Peaches (Yan et al., 2024) employ decision-making networks to determine whether a component is a shard or personalized. While promising, the current methods still rely on a public dataset for candidate matching and introduce a high computational cost. Thus, a promising direction would be to allow each client to explore the suitable model on their own, further improving privacy and efficiency. 

## 3 METHODOLOGY 

To address the inherent constraints of MHFL, we propose FedJigsaw , which comprises three main components: the model-assembly algorithm AttenAssemble , the decentralized multi-agent sharing architecture SymbioArchitect , and the global tuning strategy CoRe-Tune .In the proposed FedJigsaw MHFL system, during communication round k, the participating clients’ collective model space is represented as Mk =

n 

θ(i)

> k,l

, m (i)

> k,l



| i ∈ N , l ∈ { 1, . . . , L i}

o

, where N

represents the set of all clients, and Li denotes the total number of structural modules within the heterogeneous architecture of client i. We define a module as a cohesive, human-designed functional block that encapsulates multiple fundamental layers (e.g., ResNet residual block, Transformer Encoder block). Specifically, θ(i) 

> k,l

parameterizes the trainable weights of the l-th module on client 

i, while m(i) 

> k,l

= ⟨cid , l id , type module , din , dout ⟩ encapsulates its associated lightweight metadata. This 5-tuple describes module identity, detailing its source client id ( cid ), original layer position (lid ), operation type ( type module ), and structural dimensionalities ( din , dout ). In the subsequent subsections, we formally detail the execution logic of three core components within our system. 3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 3.1 ATTEN ASSEMBLE : A TTENTION -BASED MODEL REASSEMBLY 

Unlike traditional NAS methodologies that rely on computationally costly supernet extractions(Pham et al., 2018), our proposed AttenAssemble paradigm formulates dynamic model generation as a bottom-up sequential decision process. Like playing Jigsaw, at each step, the policy only needs to consider which layer should be next, and the action space in each step will be narrowed down. 3.1.1 MODEL ASSEMBLING PROBLEM FORMULATION 

Specifically, the agent on client i firstly observes a candidate module zoo Z(i) 

> k

⊆ M k, which contains the modules that the agent can observe and select from. By autoregressively selecting and appending structural modules from this pool, it independently generates its customized model architecture Θ(i)

> k

for the current communication round. We strictly map this layer-wise construction procedure into an MDP, which is formulated as follows: • State: As we formulate the model assembling as a sequential decision problem, we define the system state s(i) 

> k,t

=



E(i)

> data

, {m(·) 

> k,l τ

}tτ =1 



, s (i) 

> k,t

∈ S as the intermediate topological architecture constructed up to step t by client i during communication round k, which encapsulates the unified local data feature E(i) 

> data

and the metadata from all previously assembled modules. • Action: At any step t, the valid action space A(i) 

> k,t

is a dynamically filtered subset of the local candidate pool Z(i) 

> k

. An action a(i) 

> k,t

= append (m(·)

> k,l

) is strictly valid only if its input dimension geometrically aligns with the output dimension of the current state s(i)

> k,t

. Furthermore, the action space incorporates a distinct STOP action to terminate the assembly process. This early-stopping mechanism allows the agents to flexibly find the personalized architecture under current constraints, rather than exhausting all available computational resources. • Transition Probability: The model structural transition in our system is strictly deterministic. • Reward: Since intermediate network assemblies cannot be meaningfully evaluated, the decision-making environment operates under a strictly sparse reward setting, yielding zero rewards during the assembly phase. A terminal reward R(i) 

> k,T

is only acquired after the entire model is constructed and evaluated. Consequently, to resolve the credit assignment problem for intermediate actions, the Monte-Carlo return is utilized, formulated as r(i) 

> k,t

= γT −tR(i) 

> k,T

.3.1.2 ATTENTION -BASED POINTER NETWORK ACTOR 

While Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) serves as a natural paradigm for generalizing across dynamic environments, standard DRL actors typically rely on fixed-dimensional action spaces. This severely limits their applicability in our formulated MDP, where the available architectural modules (i.e., action space) dynamically fluctuate based on the topological neighbors. To bridge this gap, inspired by the original pointer network(Vinyals et al., 2015), AttenAssemble 

introduces a tailored Attention-based Pointer Network Actor. By leveraging a Query-Key attention matching process, this actor effortlessly handles variable-length action spaces and captures the complex correlations between the current architecture and the candidate modules. Remarkably, despite observing only metadata, the actor implicitly learns the learned semantic compatibility through continuous environmental feedback. This attention mechanism precludes semantic mismatches, thereby circumventing the severe gradient conflicts that may happen in parameter aggregation. The pseudocode is provided in Appendix A.1. 

Policy Network As depicted in Fig. 1, we formulate the model assembling process as a sequence modeling task, drawing inspiration from natural language processing. Prior to sequence construction, the raw local data representations and structural metadata are projected into a unified embedding space via lightweight encoders. Subsequently, AttenAssemble constructs a unified input se-quence, which is concatenated by the local data feature token E(i) 

> Data

(serving as the CLS token), the sequentially assembled state tokens EState (length N ), and the valid candidate action tokens EAction 

(length K). 4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 

Figure 1: The architecture of the AttenAssemble policy network. The sequence will then be contextualized by a multi-head Transformer encoder. To seamlessly handle the variable action space, a Pointer Network head is employed to compute the action distribution via dot-product attention score, which directly formulates the policy π(a | s) in our reinforcement learning framework. Specifically, it utilizes the hidden representation of the most recent assembled layer as the query q, and the K candidates as the key matrix KAct :

πθ (a | s(i)

> k,t

) = Softmax 

 qW Q(Kact WK )⊤

τ √dmodel 



(1) In this way, not only the relationship between the last layer and the actions has been considered, but also the information of the previous layers has been encoded into the query q through the Transformer encoder. To facilitate exploration during policy training, a temperature parameter τ is introduced to scale the raw logits generated by the Pointer Network. Applying this scaling prior to the Softmax activation dynamically modulates the entropy of the action distribution, thereby preventing premature greedy selection leading to a local optimum. Subsequently, the Actor network is optimized via the REINFORCE algorithm, updating the parameters in the direction of the module selection log-probabilities scaled by the discounted returns. 

Figure 2: The architecture of the FedJigsaw MHFL system. The left side illustrates the 

SymbioArchitect , while the right side shows the Centralized Server used in the CTDE scheme. 3.2 SYMBIO ARCHITECT : F EDERATED MODULE PROPAGATION AND SHARING MECHANISM 

Building upon the model assembly mechanism introduced in Section 3.1, this section broadens the scope to system-wide collaboration. Specifically, we will discuss how clients dynamically exchange knowledge, including both parameters and structural models, across a decentralized MHFL network. 5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 3.2.1 SHARING SCHEME 

Structural Sharing Building upon this layer-wise model assembling scheme, a critical challenge lies in managing the dynamic action space. Recent approaches like pFedHR(Wang et al., 2023a) impose rigid heuristic constraints to ensure a lower bound of module utilization. However, under such paradigms, unselected modules in early rounds are often prematurely abandoned, leading to architectural collapse. Furthermore, their reliance on ”layer stitching” to resolve dimensional mismatches frequently introduces a prohibitive parameter overhead. To stabilize the candidate pool and prevent module deprecation, as illustrated in Fig. 2, each client maintains its assigned task-specific architecture as a local base model, thereby guaranteeing a struc-turally bounded search space. Notably, unlike existing approaches, this local base model functions exclusively as a passive knowledge repository and doesn’t participate in active computation .Because it bypasses parameter updates during local training, it doesn’t introduce additional com-putational overhead. Under this paradigm, the global collective model space is formally defined as 

Mk = {(θ(j) 

> k,l

, m (j) 

> l

) | j ∈ N , l ∈ { 1, . . . , L i}} as the metadata won’t change. Instead of synchronizing entire architectures(Wang et al., 2023a), which results in high communica-tional overhead, clients merely broadcast their structural metadata m(j) 

> l

within their neighborhood defined as Ni ⊆ N . The AttenAssemble agent screens this metadata to filter compatible candi-date modules. Upon selection, the physical parameters of the target layer θ(j) 

> k,l

are retrieved for local assembly, and this routing decision is immediately logged into the local buffer for future Monte Carlo reward return. Consequently, the AttenAssemble agent consistently operates over a candidate layer zoo from both its local base model and neighboring peers. Thus, the candidate layer zoo is formally defined as 

Z(i) 

> k

= {(θ(j) 

> k,l

, m (j) 

> k

) | j ∈ { i} ∪ N i, l ∈ { 1, . . . , L j }} . While the size of the candidate pool remains stable, the underlying parameters of these modules are continuously refined, ensuring progressive knowledge assimilation without action space expansion. 

Parameter Aggregation While decentralized module sharing facilitates knowledge transfer, it cannot guarantee that the distributed knowledge will converge to a stable consensus throughout the collaboration. To ensure a progressive convergence, we introduce a source-based aggregation mechanism, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Following the local training, the parameters of the assembled layers are transmitted back to their originating source client for localized aggregation. We use P(j) 

> k,l

to denote the subset of clients that borrowed module l from source client j during round 

k. The source client aggregates the updated parameters θj→pk,l from all borrowing peers p ∈ P (j)

> k,l

following the Eq. 2. In this way, the local updates will be consolidated into a unified consensus. 

θ(j) 

> k+1 ,l

= 1

|P (j) 

> k,l

|

X

> p∈P (j)
> k,l

θ(j→p) 

> k,l

(2) 3.2.2 NON -C OOPERATIVE GAME CHALLENGE 

Partially Observable Challenge When the model assembly is strictly confined to an isolated client, the sequential decision process is a standard MDP. However, the SymbioArchitect 

mechanism escalates system complexity, thereby casting the problem as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Due to strict privacy constraints, an agent cannot directly observe its neighbors’ underlying data feature E(j) 

> data

or model parameters, but is restricted to observing only the broadcasted structural metadata. Consequently, the local AttenAssemble agent faces severe partial observability: it must make critical model-assembling decisions without knowing the underlying data distributions that shaped the neighboring candidate modules. Crucially, this partial observability is exacerbated by the multi-agent nature. As all clients concurrently update their local policies, the environment from the perspective of any individual agent becomes highly non-stationary. Consequently, the entire system evolves into a Non-Cooperative Game . If each client acts greedily to maximize only its local validation accuracy, the system is prone to converging 6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 to a suboptimal Nash Equilibrium. Even if each individual exhibits exploration behavior, it still lacks the capability to guide the entire system from one Nash Equilibrium to another. 

Implicit Collaboration Exploration via Reward Design: Since a standard Nash Equilibrium is rarely Pareto-Optimal, blind and selfish local exploration is insufficient. To guide the entire multi-agent system towards a globally cooperative and stable state, clients must engage in implicit collaboration during their exploration. To achieve this, we design the environment feedback by formulating the terminal reward R(i) 

> k,T

as a weighted combination of local performance, a targeted exploration bonus, and hardware constraints: 

R(i) 

> k,T

= α · Acc (i) + (1 − α) · Exp (i) + β · Cap (i) (3) where Acc (i) represents the validation accuracy of the fully assembled model, and Cap (i) is the hardware utilization bonus, which guides the agent away from generating too shallow models. To break the suboptimal Nash trap, Exp (i) explicitly incentivizes clients with similar data distributions to discover diverse, orthogonal topological structures, defined as: Exp (i) = 1

|N | − 1

X 

> j̸=i

cos (E(i)

> data

, E (j)

> data

) ·



1 − cos (E(i)

> arch

, E (j)

> arch

)



(4) where E(i) 

> arch

represents the encoded architectural feature of the assembled model. Intuitively, the higher the data similarity (cosine similarity of Edata ) between two clients, the stronger the penalty if they adopt similar architectures. By forcing homogeneous clients to explore distinct branches of action space, this mechanism encourages a thorough exploration. Notably, the Exp (i) computation leverages the global coordination introduced by Core-Tune (Sec. 3.3). By evaluating data similarity solely on a task-agnostic auxiliary dataset, we ensure that the genuine feature representations Edata 

of the local task data are never shared, in order to address privacy vulnerabilities. 3.3 CORE-T UNE : A TTENTION -E NHANCED CTDE T UNING STRATEGY 

As discussed in Sec. 3.2.2, relying solely on decentralized policy updates within a POMDP inevitably leads to severe environmental non-stationarity. To break this information asymmetry, we propose 

CoRe-Tune , an attention-enhanced CTDE tuning strategy that utilizes a task-agnostic proxy dataset on the clients to explicitly guide the local agents’ policies. By doing so, we successfully impart a global vision to the agents while rigorously preserving privacy, as the genuine local data distributions are never exposed to any party within the MHFL system. Recognizing that access to a suitable proxy dataset is rarely guaranteed in practical federated deployments, we deliberately design this server-side guidance as an Optional Phase . The detailed pseudocode is provided in Appendix A.2. 

CoRe-Tune uses a CTDE scheme to introduce a centralized critic network parameterized by ϑ on the server. This scheme will ask local clients to share information during policy training, but once the policies converge, the server can be fully decoupled . This ensures that during the execution phase, clients can make assembly decisions independently, based solely on their local observations, while still maintaining the cooperative behaviors learned from the centralized critic. As shown in Fig. 2, the centralized server collects the local data feature E(i)

> data

, which encapsulates the local data distribution and the assembled model characteristics through the transformer encoding in AttenAssemble . These features are processed by a Transformer Encoder to formulate the global information Zt. Meanwhile, the local observation history h(i) 

> t

is fed into another Transformer Encoder to generate the history embedding E(i)

> History,t

. Although the actor’s decision relies on current observations, the critic must be conditioned on the observation history. As highlighted by Lyu et al. Lyu et al. (2023), without an observation history sequence, the critic would have less information than the actor, leading to biased value estimations and failing to infer the policy accurately. The local policy network θi is then optimized by minimizing the following global policy gradient objective: 

∇θi J(θi) = Eπ

" TiX

> t=1

∇θi log πθi (a(i) 

> k,t

| h(i)

> k,t

)Aϑ(h(i)

> k,t

, Z t)

#

(5) 7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 where h(i) 

> k,t

represents the local observation history of client i up to step t, aligning with the decentral-ized execution constraint. Crucially, the advantage function Aϑ(h(i)

> k,t

, Z t) = r(i) 

> k,t

− Vϑ(h(i)

> k,t

, Z t) is calculated by subtracting the centralized critic’s value estimation from the empirical Monte Carlo return, which we have discussed in Sec. 3.1.1. The detailed experiment setup and convergence analysis is detailed in App. A.4. 

## 4 EXPERIMENTS 

4.1 EXPERIMENT SETUP 

Experimental Setup & Baselines: We evaluate FedJigsaw on five image classification datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet, FEMNIST, and SVHN), partitioning the data across 10 continuously active clients organized in a fully connected topology using a Dirichlet distribution 

Dir (σ) to simulate Non-IID scenarios (Chen et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2023a). To model system heterogeneity, clients are assigned diverse base architectures: lightweight CNNs (2, 3, 4, or 6 convo-lutional layers followed by 2 FC layers) for simpler datasets, and VGG variants (VGG-11, 13, 16, 19) for complex tasks. We benchmark against state-of-the-art Partial Training (PT) and model reassembly methods— HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021) , FedRolex (Alam et al., 2022) , FedShapleX (Chen et al., 2025) , and pFedHR (Wang et al., 2023a) . For a fair comparison, the largest target architecture in each setting is consistently initialized as the global supernet across all baselines. 4.2 PERFORMANCE VALIDATION 

Model Performance: Tab. 1 demonstrates that FedJigsaw achieves superior personalization ca-pacity across MHFL systems, yielding an average absolute local accuracy improvement of 3.94% (13.87% relative) across all settings. It delivers state-of-the-art results on complex tasks under High Non-IID scenarios, reaching 84.93% on CIFAR-10, 53.77% on CIFAR-100, and 35.14% on Tiny-ImageNet, significantly outperforming the best baselines (62.30%, 50.56%, and 21.79%, respectively). In Low Non-IID scenarios where local datasets are class-rich and uniformly distributed, PT-based methods occasionally show slight advantages. This is theoretically expected, as their shared global backbone acts as a strong prior to mitigate the local capacity bottlenecks of small models. However, despite being a decentralized backbone-free approach lacking such global guidance, FedJigsaw suc-cessfully maintains highly competitive and stable performance, effectively avoiding the catastrophic memory failures (e.g., OOM) prevalent in centralized NAS methods. Beyond raw accuracy, the variance metrics reveal FedJigsaw’s exceptional stability and cross-client fairness. PT-based methods often exhibit performance fluctuations across clients (e.g., FedShapleX reaching a massive 0.1877 variance on FEMNIST, while HeteroFL hitting 0.1269). This instability occurs because forcing a global backbone onto highly heterogeneous local data through subnet extractions inevitably benefits some clients while penalizing others. In contrast, FedJigsaw maintains a consistently tight variance across almost all scenarios (e.g., restricting the variance to 0.0431 on FEMNIST on High Non-IID). This proves that our decentralized dynamic assembly allows every individual client to tailor an optimal architecture for its specific data distribution, ensuring that high performance is shared fairly rather than skewed towards a few specific clients. 

Decision-Making Efficiency: Tab. 2 compares the system overhead regarding peak memory usage (RAM) and latency (Time) of the decision-making component, excluding local training. FedJigsaw demonstrates exceptional computational efficiency among policy-based methods, drastically reducing the latency to 1.11–1.53 seconds. This is an order of magnitude faster than FedShapleX and highly competitive with extremely lightweight rule-based heuristic baselines. Regarding memory footprint, while FedJigsaw requires moderately higher RAM on the centralized server when using CoRe-Tune compared to heuristic approaches, it introduces minimal additional memory and computational costs on the local clients. However, FedJigsaw’s memory requirement remains well within practical hardware limits and completely avoids Out-Of-Memory (OOM) failures that paralyze NAS or model reassembly methods like pFedHR, proving its outstanding scalability. 8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027                                                                                     

> Method CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100 Tiny-ImageNet FEMNIST SVHN
> Low High Low High Low High Low High Low High
> PT-based MHFL
> HeteroFL 49.40 ±0.0567 54.05 ±0.0464 37.42 ±0.0217 31.19 ±0.0275 14.39 ±0.0179 20.10 ±0.0393 61.07 ±0.1269 75.28 ±0.0523 86.11 ±0.0326 84.95 ±0.0880
> FedRolex 47.80 ±0.0556 61.60 ±0.0529 36.75 ±0.0420 37.34 ±0.0324 15.30 ±0.0198 20.89 ±0.0310 67.26 ±0.1055 74.47 ±0.0624 84.14 ±0.0417 85.49 ±0.0678
> FedShapleX 54.03 ±0.0713 62.30 ±0.0519 27.09 ±0.0217 50.56 ±0.0528 14.54 ±0.0162 21.79 ±0.0351 80.11 ±0.0618 74.58 ±0.1877 83.35 ±0.0486 88.31 ±0.0819
> NAS-based FL
> pFedHR 45.45 ±0.0054 54.16 ±0.1379 OOM OOM OOM OOM 70.78 ±0.0309 73.77 ±0.0962 78.23 ±0.0197 83.55 ±0.0769
> FedJigsaw (Ours) 59.61 ±0.0543 84.93 ±0.0616 37.43 ±0.0208 53.77 ±0.0394 21.10 ±0.0391 35.14 ±0.0340 73.01 ±0.0464 76.72 ±0.0431 78.26 ±0.0449 90.59 ±0.0567
> Ablation Study
> W/O SymbioArchitect 51.83 ±0.0797 81.74 ±0.0901 27.55 ±0.0411 47.87 ±0.0540 13.17 ±0.0309 29.07 ±0.0347 69.77 ±0.0519 76.46 ±0.0563 74.97 ±0.0779 86.32 ±0.1069
> W/O CoRe-Tune 52.57 ±0.0711 82.24 ±0.0803 33.51 ±0.0268 50.97 ±0.0477 18.92 ±0.0317 31.21 ±0.0513 69.26 ±0.0451 76.16 ±0.0532 72.36 ±0.1088 86.03 ±0.1216

Table 1: Test accuracy (%) and standard deviation (across clients) across five datasets under Low Non-IID (e.g., α = 1 .0) and High Non-IID (e.g., α = 0 .1) settings. OOM stands for Out Of Memory. 

Method CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100 Tiny-ImageNet FEMNIST SVHN 

RAM Time RAM Time RAM Time RAM Time RAM Time 

Heuristic-based MHFL 

HeteroFL 0.58 0.72 0.59 1.13 0.52 1.71 0.26 1.34 0.27 1.97 FedRolex 0.57 0.98 0.63 1.39 0.57 1.27 0.29 1.76 0.29 1.03 

Policy-based MHFL 

FedShapleX 1.81 9.61 1.93 11.90 3.76 19.34 2.69 11.04 2.36 13.88 pFedHR 61.70 626.71 OOM OOM OOM OOM 37.20 1057.32 23.09 1152.60 

FedJigsaw (Ours) 2.61 1.11 7.65 1.29 7.69 1.53 1.26 1.28 2.59 1.40 

Table 2: System overhead comparison. RAM denotes the peak local memory footprint (in GB), and Time represents the average computation/communication latency per round (in seconds). 4.3 ABLATION STUDIES 

Effectiveness of SymbioArchitect : To confirm that models genuinely share knowledge rather than merely overfitting locally, we evaluate the variant enabling only SymbioArchitect (W/O CoRe-Tune) against the strictly isolated baseline (W/O SymbioArchitect). As shown in Tab. 1, 

SymbioArchitect delivers consistent improvements across all benchmarks. Under Low Non-IID, it notably boosts local accuracy on CIFAR-100 (27.55% → 33.51%) and Tiny-ImageNet (13.17% →

18.92%). These gains prove that decentralized module sharing effectively shatters local data isolation, empowering clients to acquire missing class representations from their topological peers in severely Non-IID environments. 

Effectiveness of CoRe-Tune : Comparing the full framework against the W/O CoRe-Tune variant demonstrates that CoRe-Tune significantly enhances accuracy and cross-client stability. Mitigating the severe environmental non-stationarity inherent in decentralized MARL prevents catastrophic strategy oscillation. For instance, CoRe-Tune boosts CIFAR-100 accuracy from 33.51%/50.97% to 37.43%/53.77% (Low/High Non-IID), while shrinking variance on SVHN from 0.1088/0.1216 to 0.0449/0.0567. Notably, even if CoRe-Tune is disabled due to no available proxy dataset, 

FedJigsaw remains highly competitive. On the challenging High Non-IID Tiny-ImageNet, the W/O CoRe-Tune variant still achieves 31.21% accuracy, surpassing the best baseline (FedShapleX at 21.79%) by nearly 10%. Overall, FedJigsaw delivers strong standalone performance without aux-iliary data, while CoRe-Tune further pushes its boundaries to achieve state-of-the-art collaborative efficiency. 

## 5 CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we proposed FedJigsaw , a novel framework that reformulates PT-based MHFL from rigid sub-network extraction into a multi-agent decentralized model reassembly problem. We introduced AttenAssemble , an attention-based sequential decision paradigm empowering clients to autonomously construct customized architectures with minimal local latency. To break the physical isolation of heterogeneous backbones, we designed SymbioArchitect , elevating knowledge transfer from parameter aggregation to structural module sharing within topological neighborhoods. Furthermore, to mitigate the non-stationarity of multi-agent interactions, we developed CoRe-Tune ,an attention-enhanced tuning strategy that stabilizes local policies while preserving privacy. Extensive 9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 experiments demonstrate that FedJigsaw significantly improves local accuracy and cross-client fairness while maintaining an exceptionally lightweight memory footprint, offering a scalable solution for resource-constrained edge deployments. The limitations are discussed in Appendix A.5. 

## REFERENCES 

Samiul Alam, Luyang Liu, Ming Yan, and Mi Zhang. Fedrolex: Model-heterogeneous federated learning with rolling sub-model extraction. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:29677–29690, 2022. Jifeng Chen, Haibo Zhang, and Amanda Barnard. Fedshaplex: Shapley value driven context-aware model-heterogeneous federated learning. In 2025 IEEE 45th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) , pp. 395–405, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICDCS63083.2025. 00046. Zekai Chen, Chentao Jia, Ming Hu, Xiaofei Xie, Anran Li, and Mingsong Chen. Flexfl: Het-erogeneous federated learning via apoz-guided flexible pruning in uncertain scenarios. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 43(11):4069–4080, 2024. Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Heterofl: Computation and communication efficient federated learning for heterogeneous clients. In 9th International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations, ICLR 2021 , 2021. Chaoyang He, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. Towards non-iid and invisible data with fednas: Federated deep learning via neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08546 ,2020. Samuel Horvath, Stefanos Laskaridis, Mario Almeida, Ilias Leontiadis, Stylianos Venieris, and Nicholas Lane. Fjord: Fair and accurate federated learning under heterogeneous targets with ordered dropout. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:12876–12889, 2021. Daliang Li and Junpu Wang. Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03581 , 2019. Qinbin Li, Bingsheng He, and Dawn Song. Model-contrastive federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10713–10722, 2021. Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Nguyen Cong Luong, Dinh Thai Hoang, Yutao Jiao, Ying-Chang Liang, Qiang Yang, Dusit Niyato, and Chunyan Miao. Federated learning in mobile edge networks: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 22(3):2031–2063, 2020. doi: 10.1109/COMST.2020.2986024. Tao Lin, Lingjing Kong, Sebastian U Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Ensemble distillation for robust model fusion in federated learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:2351–2363, 2020. Xueguang Lyu, Andrea Baisero, Yuchen Xiao, Brett Daley, and Christopher Amato. On centralized critics in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 77: 295–354, 2023. Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture search via parameters sharing. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 4095–4104. PMLR, 2018. Nurbek Tastan, Samar Fares, Toluwani Aremu, Samuel Horvath, and Karthik Nandakumar. Redefining contributions: Shapley-driven federated learning. In 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2024 , pp. 5009–5017. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 2024. Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28, 2015. 10 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 Jiaqi Wang, Xingyi Yang, Suhan Cui, Liwei Che, Lingjuan Lyu, Dongkuan DK Xu, and Fenglong Ma. Towards personalized federated learning via heterogeneous model reassembly. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:29515–29531, 2023a. Jiaqi Wang, Shenglai Zeng, Zewei Long, Yaqing Wang, Houping Xiao, and Fenglong Ma. Knowledge-enhanced semi-supervised federated learning for aggregating heterogeneous lightweight clients in iot. In Proceedings of the 2023 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM) , pp. 496–504. SIAM, 2023b. Dingzhu Wen, Ki-Jun Jeon, and Kaibin Huang. Federated dropout—a simple approach for enabling federated learning on resource constrained devices. IEEE wireless communications letters , 11(5): 923–927, 2022. Jian Xu, Xinyi Tong, and Shao-Lun Huang. Personalized federated learning with feature alignment and classifier collaboration. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. Jiaming Yan, Jianchun Liu, Hongli Xu, Zhiyuan Wang, and Chunming Qiao. Peaches: Personalized federated learning with neural architecture search in edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 23(11):10296–10312, 2024. Xingyi Yang, Daquan Zhou, Songhua Liu, Jingwen Ye, and Xinchao Wang. Deep model reassembly. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:25739–25753, 2022. Dixi Yao and Baochun Li. Perfedrlnas: One-for-all personalized federated neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pp. 16398–16406, 2024. Liping Yi, Han Yu, Chao Ren, Gang Wang, Xiaoguang Liu, and Xiaoxiao Li. Federated model heterogeneous matryoshka representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:66431–66454, 2024. 11 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 

## A TECHNICAL APPENDICES AND SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

A.1 ATTEN ASSEMBLE MODEL ASSEMBLY PSEUDOCODE 

Algorithm 1 describes the action flow of the proposed AttenAssemble module, which dynamically constructs a customized neural block by block. The assembly loop (steps 1-5) iteratively builds the model sequence. It fundamentally consists of State Encoding (lines 2-7), which encodes the current state into a sequence, Valid Action Collecting (lines 8-11), which collects the valid metadata, Action Encoding (lines 13-15), which encodes the valid actions into a sequence, and Transformer-based policy execution (lines 18-20). Afterward, the generated abstract metadata sequence is mapped and instantiated as a physical neural network suitable for local training (lines 21-25). 

Algorithm 1: AttenAssemble : Attention-based Sequential Architecture Assembly 

Input: Client physical capacity Ci, Local data embedding Edata , Topological neighbors metadata pool Pi, Actor network θi, Layer encoder Elayer , Temperature τ .

Output: Assembled customized model Mi, RL trajectory Ti. 

> 1

Initialization: State sequence S ← ∅ , RL Trajectory Ti ← ∅ , Transformer token sequence 

E ← [Edata ], Current output dimension dout ← Initial Shape;  

> 2

for step t = 1 , 2, . . . , C i do 

// 1. State Encoding  

> 3

if S is not empty then  

> 4

for each metadata m ∈ S do  

> 5

Encode state token: enc s ← E layer (m, segment=1 ); 

> 6

Append enc s to token sequence E; 

> 7

Update dout according to m;

// 2. Valid Action Collecting  

> 8

Initialize valid action set Avalid ← ∅ ; 

> 9

for each metadata m ∈ P i do  

> 10

if (VolumeMatch( m, d out )) then  

> 11

Avalid ← A valid ∪ { m}; 

> 12

Avalid ← A valid ∪ { STOP TOKEN };

// 3. Action Encoding  

> 13

for each a ∈ A valid do  

> 14

Encode action token: enc a ← E layer (a, segment=2 ); 

> 15

Append enc a to token sequence E;

// 4. Pointer Network Decision  

> 16

P ← T ransf ormer (E, τ, π θ ); 

> 17

Sample action at ∼ Categorical (P);

// 5. State Update & Trajectory Recording  

> 18

Append at to S; 

> 19

Record (log p(at), a t, zglobal ) into trajectory Ti; 

> 20

if at == {STOP TOKEN } then break ;

// 6. Model Assembly  

> 21

Initialize empty neural sequential container Mi; 

> 22

for each module m ∈ S \ { STOP TOKEN } do  

> 23

Fetch physical layer θm ; 

> 24

Append θm to Mi; 

> 25

return Mi, Ti;A.2 FED JIGSAW MHFL F RAMEWORK PSEUDOCODE 

Algorithm 2 describes the detailed procedure of the proposed FedJigsaw framework, which includes dynamic model assembly, local training, and multi-agent policy optimization. The client first assembles the local model using algorithm 1 (lines 5-6). Then, during local training, the assembled model Mi,k will be updated on the local dataset and evaluated (lines 7-9). Afterward, using the 12 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 Actor-Critic Policy, the final reward is first computed, and then the advantage function is computed from the reward and the critic’s estimated Vϑ (lines 10-12). As the reward is computed, the actor θi is updated and the critic loss is recorded (lines 13-14). Then, as the models are assembled and trained, the updated parameters will be sent back for aggregation (lines 15-17). Finally, the critic Vϑ will be updated using the recorded critic loss (line 18). 

Algorithm 2: FedJigsaw 

Input: Communication rounds K, Client set N , Client datasets {D i}|N | 

> i=1

, Topology graph G,Server Critic Vϕ, Global module pool Ω.

Output: Optimized local architectures and corresponding trained modules.  

> 1

Server Initialization: Initialize global modular weights in Ω, shared encoders Elayer , Edata , and Server Critic Vϕ; 

> 2

Client Initialization: Each client i ∈ N initializes Actor πθi and topology neighborhood Pi

based on G; 

> 3

for round k = 1 , 2, . . . , K do  

> 4

for each client i ∈ Sk do 

// 1. Local Architecture Assembly (Refer to Alg. 1)  

> 5

Execute AttenAssemble to obtain model and trajectory:  

> 6

(Mi,k , Ti,k ) ← Algorithm 1 (Ci, Edata (Di), Pi, π θi , Elayer , τ );

// 2. Local Training & Evaluation  

> 7

Train assembled model Mi,k on local dataset Di for E epochs;  

> 8

Evaluate model to obtain test accuracy Acc i,k ; 

> 9

Extract updated parameters ∆wi,k of the selected modules; 

// 3. Actor-Critic Policy Optimization  

> 10

Compute final reward Ri,k ← αAcc i,k + (1 − α)Exp i + βCap i; 

> 11

for each step t in trajectory Ti,k do  

> 12

Compute Advantage At ← γT −tRi,k − Vϑ(st, zglobal ); 

> 13

Update Actor θi via ∇θi log πθi (at|st)At; 

> 14

Calculate Critic Loss Lϕ ← MSE (vs, G t); 

> 15

for each structural module m ∈ Ω do  

> 16

if module m is selected by any client in Sk then  

> 17

Parameter Aggregation: wm ← wm + 1

> |Sk,m |

P 

> i∈Sk,m

∆wi,m ; 

> 18

Update Server Critic Vϑ using aggregated Lϕ;A.3 FURTHER DISCUSSION ON SUBMODEL SLICING IN PT-BASED MHFL While Partial Training paradigms, such as HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021) and FedRolex (Alam et al., 2022), have pioneered the mitigation of computational heterogeneity. Their reliance on rigid submodel slicing introduces several fundamental architectural limitations. 

Semantic Misalignment and Residual Coupling Breakdown In typical PT-based methods, sub-networks are generated by aggressively selecting neurons from each hidden layer and truncating the width of the global model. However, modern neural architectures rely heavily on complex structural couplings, such as residual connections. When a global supernet is arbitrarily sliced into narrower heterogeneous sub-networks, the strict dimensional equivalence required for addition operations is broken. As addition operations across different sub-models may be affected by semantic misalignment, this can lead to severe semantic drift 

and undermine the mathematical integrity of the original feature maps. By contrast, FedJigsaw 

completely circumvents this by operating at the granularity of cohesive functional modules. This ensures that internal mathematical constraints are perfectly preserved during the reassembly process. 

Topological Homogenization A more serious limitation of submodel slicing is its inherent inability to foster true architectural diversity. Because every client’s model is merely a scaled-down projection of the exact same global supernet, the topological search space is strictly bounded by the supernet’s 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 structural template. A sliced VGG network remains topologically the same as the original VGG, but with a different width. Consequently, PT methods suffer from topological homogenization. They assume that a smaller version of a universally well-performing architecture is inherently optimal for resource-constrained clients. However, under severe Non-IID conditions, a client might actually benefit from a different topology. 

FedJigsaw tries to mitigate the ”Supernet Trap” issue by replacing the top-down slicing with a bottom-up model assembly. Instead of destroying a large network, clients construct personalized local topologies sequentially using the AttenAssemble paradigm. Although the assembly is still limited to sequential embedding, FedJigsaw grants clients the freedom to explore an exponentially larger, structurally diverse combinatorial space. A.4 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND FURTHER ANALYSIS 

We implement FedJigsaw using PyTorch 2.10.0 and simulate the MHFL environment on a dedi-cated server equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU (256GB VRAM) and a 128-core CPU. All local models are optimized using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.1 for 1000 policy training rounds (with CoRe-Tune ) and another 1000 model training rounds. To balance exploration and exploitation, the hyperparameter α is set to 0.7 and 0.9 for the Low and High Non-IID settings, respectively. 

Model Convergence: Figure 3 illustrates the learning dynamics of FedJigsaw across five diverse datasets over 500 epochs. As shown in the top row, FedJigsaw achieves stable and continuous convergence in test accuracy under both Low and High Non-IID settings. Notably, the framework exhibits exceptional resilience to severe data heterogeneity, maintaining robust and even superior performance in High Non-IID scenarios. More importantly, the bottom row validates the systemic stability of our multi-agent framework. While the cross-client performance variance exhibits initial fluctuations during the early architectural exploration phase, it consistently and sharply declines, stabilizing at a remarkably low level across all datasets. This continuous variance reduction confirms that our decentralized module sharing and CoRe-Tune mechanisms successfully foster implicit collaboration. Instead of diverging due to local data biases, the participating agents effectively mitigate individual capacity bottlenecks and converge toward a stable, globally cooperative state with high cross-client fairness. 

Policy Convergence: Figure 4 visualizes the training trajectories of the CoRe-Tune networks over 500 epochs. Across all datasets, the Critic loss rapidly converges near zero, while the Actor loss naturally oscillates around zero with diminishing amplitude. Notably, FedJigsaw optimizes more efficiently under High Non-IID conditions than Low Non-IID. For instance, in FEMNIST and SVHN, the Low Non-IID setup (blue lines) exhibits larger Actor oscillations and higher residual Critic errors. This is because homogeneous data (Low Non-IID) constrains state exploration, whereas extreme heterogeneity (High Non-IID) acts as an implicit regularizer. This diverse structural variation provides the central Critic with a richer state space, accelerating global value consensus and leading to tighter, more stable policy convergence. 

Figure 3: Learning dynamics of FedJigsaw across five datasets over 500 communication rounds. The top row presents the convergence of test accuracy, while the bottom row illustrates the cross-client performance variance under both Low Non-IID and High Non-IID settings. 14 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2027 

Figure 4: Training dynamics of the Actor (top) and Critic (bottom) losses over 500 epochs. A.5 LIMITATIONS 

While FedJigsaw introduces a promising decentralized module-assembly paradigm for MHFL, we acknowledge several limitations that pave the way for future research. 

Manual Module Specification: Currently, to preserve semantic integrity and simplify the state space, FedJigsaw relies on human-designed functional blocks (e.g., ResNet or Transformer Blocks) as the basic unit of assembly. This manual uses automated graph-partitioning algorithms to dynami-cally discover and slice fine-grained modules, thereby eliminating human intervention. 

Sequential Topology and Residual Connection Constraints: The current AttenAssemble 

paradigm primarily operates under a sequential, linear assembly constraint. While this efficiently circumvents dimensional mismatches, it precludes the generation of highly complex architectures with intricate cross-module skip connections (e.g., DenseNet-like topologies). Developing a topology-aware alignment mechanism is a critical next step. In the future, the bottom-up model assembly should evolve to a topology generation problem. 

Reactive Exchange and Proactive Knowledge Diffusion: Although SymbioArchitect suc-cessfully facilitates structural knowledge transfer within topological neighborhoods, this exchange is fundamentally reactive, driven solely by local clients’ autonomous assembly demands. This framework currently lacks a systemic mechanism to actively orchestrate knowledge propagation across the MHFL system. Future work will explore proactive diffusion strategies to consciously guide and accelerate the spread of critical knowledge across the entirely decentralized network. Hopefully, as this mechanism is guiding the knowledge diffusion across the client, we expect that a generalized model concluding all local knowledge could also be generated besides the local personalized models. A.6 BROADER IMPACT 

The broader impact of FedJigsaw primarily lies in lowering the cost of deploying Federated Learning. Traditional centralized approaches usually depend on a powerful centralized server for co-ordination, which is unfriendly to start-up companies and individual developers. By reforming model personalization into a decentralized modular assembly problem, our framework eliminates the reliance on a computationally prohibitive server for supernet maintenance or architecture personalization for the clients. This lowers the barriers for deploying distributed AI, enabling resource-constrained edge devices, such as smartphones or IoT sensors, to actively participate in collaborative learning and promoting a more inclusive AI ecosystem. However, without strict centralized oversight, the exchange of modules could make the system vulnerable to Byzantine attacks, where malicious clients might broadcast poisoned modules across neighborhoods. Future deployment must incorporate robust, module-level anomaly detection to mitigate cyberattack risks. 15