Title: TensorCast: The Missing Tensor Management Layer in Large Language Model Infrastructure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06007v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 01:14:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# TensorCast: The Missing Tensor Management Layer in Large Language Model Infrastructure 

Yuhan Zhou P∗, Yuchu Luo ∗, Hao Nie S, Wangrunze Lv B∗, Yu Zhou S, Yibo Zhu S, Daxin Jiang S, Chenren Xu PPPeking University SStepfun BBeijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 

## Abstract 

Modern LLM infrastructure increasingly manages tensors not only as computation data, but also as persistent states shared across distributed components. Existing systems op-timize individual tensor management tasks, such as model weight loading, KV cache management, and checkpoint syn-chronization, by deeply integrating task-specific mechanisms with execution engines, networks, or storage backends. How-ever, this specialization creates isolated silos that hinder the reuse and composition of tensor management strategies across evolving LLM workloads. In this paper, we identify tensor lifecycle management as a missing abstraction layer in LLM infrastructure and propose Tensor-as-a-Service (TaaS), which decouples tensor state management from computa-tion logic. We design and build TensorCast, a distributed tensor management layer that provides first-class tensor ab-stractions, programmable lifecycle primitives, and a runtime that separates tensor management policies from execution mechanisms. This enables developers to write tensor manage-ment programs using TensorCast APIs while transparently leveraging distributed execution and data movement. We integrate TensorCast with vLLM and SGLang and evalu-ate it across diverse tensor lifecycle workloads, including model weight materialization, weight synchronization, KV cache management, and programmable request routing. Our results show that TensorCast achieves competitive perfor-mance with specialized tensor management systems while enabling new cross-component optimization policies. A pro-grammable policy implemented with TensorCast improves median TTFT by up to 93.2% under highly concurrent multi-turn agent workloads. 

## 1 Introduction 

Modern LLM infrastructure is rapidly scaling in both model size and deployment complexity, driven by models with bil-lions to trillions of parameters ( e.g., 2.8T parameters in Kimi K3 [1]) and stringent Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for millions of users. This evolution has pushed LLM systems beyond optimizing tensor computation alone: tensors in-creasingly become persistent states that must be managed across distributed components. For example, model weights 

> ∗

This work was done while Yuhan Zhou, Yuchu Luo, and Wangrunze Lv were affiliated with Stepfun as employees or interns. Network & Storage Backend Training Node Compute Weights Lifecycle - identify - place - transform - materialize Task A Checkpointing 

## !

Task B Instance Auto-scaling Task C KV Management Serving Node Compute Weights Lifecycle - identify - place - transform - materialize Serving Node Compute KV Lifecycle - identify - place - materialize - coordinate 

Figure 1: Existing LLM infrastructure embeds tensor lifecycle management into task-specific stacks, causing repeated mechanisms and isolated optimization silos. Network & Storage Backend Tensor-as-a-Service Layer Task A Task A + B + C + … 

Composable tensor management task programs Task A + B Training Node Compute Serving Node Compute Serving Node Compute Distributed Tensor Pool 

> weights / KV cache / ...

Distributed Lifecycle Runtime 

> workflow execution / tracing / …

Lifecycle Programming Interface 

> identify / place / materialize / transform / coordinate / …

## !

Figure 2: Decoupling tensor lifecycle management from computation. A unified Tensor-as-a-Service (TaaS) layer allows developers to compose tensor man-agement task programs across workloads. 

are distributed across elastic serving instances, KV caches are reused across nodes, and updated model weights are synchronized between training and inference pipelines. A large body of research has optimized individual tensor management tasks in LLM infrastructure. Representative ex-amples include model weight loading for service auto-scaling [2–8], KV cache placement and transfer for prefill-decode 

1arXiv:2608.06007v1 [cs.DC] 6 Aug 2026 disaggregation [9, 10] and prefix cache sharing [11–15], as well as model checkpoint storage and resharding for large-scale training [16, 17]. These systems achieve significant performance improvements by tightly integrating tensor management mechanisms with execution engines [18–20], network infrastructures ( e.g., scale-up versus scale-out net-works [21]), or storage backends. However, this task-specific optimization paradigm cre-ates a fundamental abstraction gap in LLM infrastructure. Although different workloads manipulate tensors through similar lifecycle operations such as identifying, placing, mov-ing, transforming, and materializing tensor states, existing systems expose these operations only through workload-specific interfaces tightly coupled with execution engines, network layers, or storage backends, creating isolated verti-cal silos (Fig. 1). Such tight coupling makes the underlying tensor management mechanisms difficult to extract, reuse, or compose across workloads. This lack of a unified tensor life-cycle abstraction leads to two fundamental limitations. First, developers repeatedly reimplement similar tensor lifecycle mechanisms for each workload, increasing system complex-ity and slowing the evolution of LLM infrastructure. For example, adapting a serving scheduler from a load-aware policy to a cache-affinity-aware policy may require coordi-nated modifications across request routers, KV cache sys-tems, and execution engines. Second, the lack of compos-ability prevents LLM systems from exploiting optimization opportunities that span multiple components. A distributed LLM service may need to simultaneously balance instance load, preserve KV cache locality, and migrate request states across instances. However, existing siloed solutions make such cross-component optimization difficult to express. In this paper, we argue that tensor management should become an independent abstraction layer rather than remain embedded inside individual execution systems . As tensor man-agement requirements continue to evolve and often require composing multiple lifecycle operations, such a layer must provide programmable control over tensor states throughout their lifecycle. We propose Tensor-as-a-Service (TaaS), a new abstraction layer that decouples tensor lifecycle management from the computation that produces or consumes tensors (Fig. 2). Guided by this vision, we design and build Tensor-Cast, a distributed tensor management layer for LLM infras-tructure. TensorCast realizes TaaS through three key design principles: i) Tensor-native abstraction. TensorCast repre-sents tensors as first-class system objects with explicit iden-tity, ownership, and lifecycle semantics, enabling developers to manage tensors independently from their physical place-ment and representation; ii) Programmable lifecycle manage-ment. TensorCast exposes composable primitives for tensor movement, transformation, and materialization, allowing developers to define workload-specific policies without reim-plementing low-level mechanisms; iii) Policy-mechanism sep-aration. TensorCast separates tensor management policies from execution mechanisms: developers can write ordinary programs using TensorCast APIs to compose and control tensor lifecycles, while the TensorCast runtime transpar-ently executes these operations across distributed cluster resources without requiring modifications to the underly-ing execution engines. Unlike traditional distributed object stores that treat data as opaque blobs [22–24], or computa-tion frameworks that schedule user-defined tasks [25, 26], TensorCast provides a data-centric programming model where developers control tensor lifecycle policies while the system manages the execution mechanisms, including place-ment, movement, transformation, and materialization. We integrate TensorCast with vLLM [18] and SGLang [19] LLM inference frameworks, and evaluate it across di-verse tensor lifecycle scenarios. Our results demonstrate that TensorCast achieves competitive performance with special-ized tensor management systems in model weight material-ization (§6.1), weight synchronization (§6.2), and KV cache management (§6.3), while enabling new cross-component optimization policies through programmable lifecycle com-position. In particular, a programmable request router imple-mented with TensorCast reduces median TTFT by up to 93.2% under highly concurrent multi-turn agent workloads by composing tensor lifecycle operations to jointly balance instance load and KV cache locality without modifying exist-ing serving components (§6.4). TensorCast is open-sourced at https://github.com/tensorcast-ai/tensorcast. 

Contributions. 

• We identify tensor lifecycle management as a missing abstraction layer in modern LLM infrastructure and char-acterize the common lifecycle primitives shared across diverse tensor management workloads. 

• We design and build TensorCast, a distributed tensor management layer that provides first-class tensor abstrac-tions and programmable lifecycle primitives to separate management policies from execution mechanisms. 

• We implement TensorCast and evaluate it across model weight materialization and synchronization, KV cache management, and programmable request routing. The results demonstrate both the efficiency and programma-bility of the proposed tensor lifecycle abstraction. 

This work does not raise any ethical issues. 

> 2

## 2 Background and Motivation 2.1 Tensor Management Tasks in LLM Infrastructure 

LLM training and serving workloads increasingly treat ten-sors not only as intermediate computation results, but also as persistent states that must be created, transferred, stored, and transformed across system components. Representative examples include model weights shared across serving in-stances, KV caches reused across requests, and checkpoint tensors synchronized across training and inference workers. Consequently, efficient management of these tensor states becomes a fundamental challenge in LLM infrastructure. We next discuss three representative scenarios. 

Service Auto-Scaling To accommodate fluctuating request loads, LLM service providers dynamically scale serving in-stances, enabling a serverless Model-as-a-Service (MaaS) par-adigm [27, 28]. Unlike traditional model deployment where weights are loaded once during initialization, elastic LLM serving requires repeatedly distributing large model weights (often exceeding 100 GB) to newly launched instances. There-fore, model weights become shared tensor states whose place-ment and materialization directly affect scaling latency. Exist-ing solutions optimize this process by streamlining loading from storage backends [2–4] or retrieving weights from ac-tive serving instances [5–8]. 

KV Cache Management. Modern Transformer-based LLM serving systems [29, 30] maintain KV caches to avoid re-computing attention states during autoregressive generation. These KV tensors, generated throughout the prefill and de-code phases, preserve the context required for future token generation. As context lengths grow and multi-turn interac-tions become prevalent, KV caches become large, fragmented, and reusable tensor states rather than transient execution buffers. Consequently, substantial research focuses on KV cache placement and transfer [9, 10, 15, 19, 31] for prefill-decode disaggregation [32–35], as well as KV reuse strategies for prefix caching [11, 14, 36–39]. 

Dynamic Checkpointing and Resharding. During LLM training and post-training, model tensors frequently move be-tween different system components and parallelism configu-rations. Checkpointing periodically materializes model states for fault tolerance and evaluation, while RL post-training requires synchronizing newly updated weights from train-ing actors to rollout workers. Furthermore, heterogeneous GPU resources and changing parallelism strategies require resharding checkpoint tensors into different layouts [16]. Consequently, several specialized systems have emerged to optimize model checkpointing, synchronization, and reshard-ing processes [16, 17, 40–42]. 

## 2.2 Observed Tensor Lifecycle Primitives 

Although these workloads differ in application semantics, they expose a common feature: tensor states are repeatedly manipulated through a small set of common lifecycle primi-tives that are shared across different application logic. Ten-sors require independent management of identity, placement, transformation, and coordination beyond the computation that produces or consumes them, as summarized in Tab. 1. 

• Identify and Own. Tensors first need stable identity, metadata, and ownership semantics before they can be shared across engines, processes, or time; 

• Place and Move. Tensor states must be placed, repli-cated, migrated, or prefetched across nodes and instances according to workload policies; 

• Materialize. A logical tensor state must eventually be materialized into a compute-ready representation inside an execution engine; 

• Transform. Tensor states often require slicing, viewing, layout conversion, or resharding when crossing paral-lelism configurations or engine boundaries; 

• Compose and Coordinate. Real workloads combine multiple lifecycle steps, such as publishing, moving, trans-forming, and materializing tensors, and therefore require a policy-level mechanism to coordinate these operations across distribute components. These observations reveal that tensor management is no longer tied to individual workloads or execution engines. Instead, LLM infrastructure requires a common abstraction for managing tensor states across their lifecycles, from own-ership to movement, transformation, and coordination. 

## 2.3 Limitations of Specialized Solutions 

Recently, numerous dedicated solutions have emerged to optimize individual tensor management tasks within LLM infrastructure, bringing significant performance improve-ments, as discussed in §2.1. However, despite sharing these common lifecycle primitives, existing systems expose them only through task-specific interfaces. Consequently, the same underlying tensor operations are repeatedly reimplemented and deeply coupled with different execution engines, net-work layers, and storage backends. This fragmentation leads to the following limitations. 

Lifecycle primitives are coupled with task-specific mech-anisms. Specialized solutions often integrate tensor life-cycle operations directly with workload-specific optimiza-tion logic. For example, Mooncake [9] adopts a min-TTFT strategy to schedule requests on prefill instances, which re-quires estimated prefill durations from the execution en-gine and predicted KV transfer times from the network. While such tight integration enables effective optimization 

> 3

Workload/Task Tensor State Lifecycle Challenge Common Lifecycle Primitives 

MaaS serving Model weights Distribute immutable weights to new in-stances. identify, place, transform, materi-alize KV cache management KV cache blocks Share reusable context across requests/in-stances. identify, place, materialize RL post-training Model weights Synchronize updated weights from train-ers to rollout workers. identify, transform, materialize Agentic reasoning Reasoning states Branch, offload, and restore states across instances. identify, materialize, coordinate 

Table 1: Common tensor lifecycle abstractions across representative LLM infrastructure workloads. 

for KV-centric serving, the underlying tensor placement and movement mechanisms cannot be easily reused by other workloads. Consequently, tensor management tasks such as model weight distribution and KV cache migration are im-plemented as independent “vertical silos” that are deeply in-tegrated with execution engines, network layers, and storage backends (Fig. 1). This task-specific design creates substan-tial engineering overhead as new tensor lifecycle require-ments emerge. Furthermore, because optimization policies are frequently hard-coded within individual systems, adapt-ing them requires modifying low-level mechanisms rather than composing existing primitives. For instance, transition-ing a PD-disaggregated serving scheduler from min-TTFT [9] to a cache-affinity and load-balancing aware strategy [10] re-quires intrusive changes across the serving stack. This tight coupling restricts code reuse and limits the extensibility of tensor management strategies. 

Lack of programmable composition across tensor life-cycles. Beyond optimizing individual tensor management tasks, modern LLM services increasingly require composing multiple lifecycle primitives under workload-specific policies. For example, a distributed LLM serving system may need to simultaneously balance instance load, preserve KV cache locality, and migrate request states across instances [43]. Such optimization requires coordinating tensor placement, migration, and materialization with application-level deci-sions. However, existing solutions expose these capabilities through fixed, task-specific interfaces. KV cache systems fo-cus on cache storage, reuse, and transfer [9, 12, 44–46], while request schedulers optimize routing decisions [10]. Combin-ing these mechanisms requires intrusive integration across multiple components, preventing developers from flexibly implementing new tensor management policies. This limi-tation has also been identified from the perspective of LLM execution engine design, where supporting emerging applica-tions requires more programmable control over the inference process [47]. This limitation becomes increasingly important for emerging workloads with dynamic execution patterns. Reasoning approaches such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [48] and Tree-of-Thought (ToT) [49] introduce intermediate ex-ecution states, such as reusable KV caches and branching context representations, that may need to be reused, du-plicated, or migrated across instances. As such workloads become increasingly integrated into LLM applications and RL post-training rollouts [50–53], supporting them requires a programmable tensor management abstraction rather than another task-specific optimization stack. 

## 2.4 Requirements for Tensor-as-a-Service 

The limitations above stem from the absence of a unified abstraction for managing tensor lifecycles across LLM work-loads. Conceptually, modern LLM systems consist of tensor-producing and tensor-consuming computation, while tensors increasingly become externally manageable states that re-quire independent placement, movement, transformation, and reuse. However, existing systems embed these lifecycle mechanisms inside individual optimization stacks, limiting their composability and extensibility. Therefore, we propose decoupling tensor management from execution logic into an independent service layer that provides a state-management interface to execution engines as well as network and storage backends (Fig. 2). This Tensor-as-a-Service (TaaS) paradigm must satisfy the following requirements: 

Tensor-native abstraction. The TaaS layer should natively understand tensor semantics and lifecycle, including differ-ent tensor states such as model weights and KV caches. Un-like traditional distributed object storage systems such as Redis [22], Vineyard [23], and Ray-Plasma [24], which treat data as opaque blobs, a tensor management layer should maintain tensor identity, ownership, placement, and trans-formation semantics. It should provide first-class handles for users to access and manipulate tensors while abstracting the underlying creation, transfer, storage, and transformation mechanisms through a high-performance implementation. 

Programmable lifecycle management. To support poten-tially infinite combinations of tensor management policies,   

> 4Cluster TensorCast Worker LLM Instance Caller LLM App Caller connect & exec. operations result & signals

Figure 3: TensorCast’s programming model. 

the TaaS layer should provide programmable lifecycle primi-tives rather than hard-code optimization strategies. Different from compute-centric frameworks such as Spark [26] and Ray [25], where users dispatch computation tasks, TaaS users orchestrate tensor states by composing lifecycle operations and defining workload-specific policies. This programmabil-ity enables system extensibility while maintaining a reusable tensor management substrate. 

Cluster-scale execution. As a unified service layer, TaaS must efficiently manage tensor states across cluster-scale resources with heterogeneous memory, network, and storage hierarchies. Achieving this requires distributed metadata management, fault tolerance, and a runtime environment with minimal overhead on execution paths. 

## 3 TensorCast Programming Framework 

To realize the TaaS paradigm described in §2.4, TensorCast exposes tensor lifecycle primitives through a programmable framework that separates tensor management policies from execution mechanisms. Specifically, TensorCast maps the lifecycle abstractions identified in §2.2 into four program-ming abstractions: Artifact for tensor identity and ownership, 

Operation for tensor lifecycle manipulation, Plan for compos-ing distributed workflows, and Signal for policy feedback. This section presents the programming model (§3.1), the lifecycle APIs (§3.2), and an illustrative example (§3.3). 

## 3.1 Programming Model 

TensorCast separates tensor management policies from ex-ecution mechanisms through a caller-worker programming model. Callers define workload- specific tensor management strategies by composing lifecycle operations, while Tensor-Cast workers provide the distributed runtime that stores tensors and executes these operations. As Fig. 3 illustrates, users write tensor management programs on callers ; each caller connects to a TensorCast worker to obtain a Runtime 

handle. Workers maintain tensor states, execute lifecycle operations in a distributed manner, and return execution results together with internal state signals to callers for error handling, tracing, and policy decisions. Based on their roles, callers fall into two categories: 

Application Caller. Application callers implement workload-level tensor management policies. They may physically re-side within a TensorCast cluster but remain logically ex-ternal to the tensor management runtime, accessing Ten-sorCast as a service for LLM applications. Typical exam-ples include request routers, auto-scaling managers, and orchestrators for multi-instance inference ( e.g., ToT reason-ing). These callers explicitly coordinate tensor operations with application-level computation ( e.g., prefill and decode), enabling fine-grained control over tensor lifecycles with-out modifying the underlying execution engines. We later demonstrate an application caller through a programmable KV cache rebalancing policy in §3.3. 

Instance Caller. Instance callers provide the mechanism boundary between TensorCast and execution engines. They operate logically inside the TensorCast cluster and typically integrate directly with inference or training instances to ex-pose engine-resident tensor states. For example, to support KV cache sharing, a minimal SGLang integration caller imple-ments the HiCache [12] interfaces while connecting to a Ten-sorCast worker, allowing the entire TensorCast cluster to serve as the KV backend. Unlike existing task-specific inte-grations such as Mooncake [9] and LMCache [11], which typ-ically couple tensor movement mechanisms with optimiza-tion policies, TensorCast’s instance integration fixes only the mechanism required to access engine-resident tensors. The management policy remains programmable through callers, allowing different tensor management strategies to be implemented without modifying the execution engines. 

## 3.2 Lifecycle Programming Abstractions 

TensorCast provides four programming abstractions that realize the tensor lifecycle primitives described in §2.2. Arti-fact represents tensor states and ownership; Operation pro-vides lifecycle manipulation primitives; Plan composes dis-tributed tensor workflows; and Signal exposes runtime infor-mation required for policy decisions. Together, these abstrac-tions separate tensor management policies from execution mechanisms while providing a unified interface for diverse LLM workloads. Tab. 2 summarizes the essential APIs. 

Artifact. It is the first-class representation of tensor states in TensorCast. It decouples tensor identity, ownership, and lifecycle from the underlying physical representation, allow-ing callers to manipulate tensors without explicitly man-aging their storage locations or device layouts. From the caller’s perspective, an Artifact is a logical handle to a tensor stored in the unified tensor pool. The actual tensor content is maintained by TensorCast workers as distributed replicas and is materialized only when callers request a con-crete tensor representation through tensor() . This separa-tion enables TensorCast to independently optimize tensor 

> 5

Category Class & Function Description 

Artifact register(tensor, art_id) -> Artifact Register a caller-leased tensor to TensorCast.     

> put(tensor, art_id) -> Artifact

Put a system-owned tensor to TensorCast.    

> artifact(art_id) -> Artifact

Get an Artifact handle from TensorCast given an ID.    

> Artifact.tensor_meta() -> TensorMeta

Get the tensor metadata of an Artifact .   

> Artifact.tensor_dict() -> Tensor

Materialize a tensor from an Artifact . Blocking.     

> Artifact.view(slice, name) -> Artifact

Derive a new Artifact from a view of an existing one. 

Plan context(id, ddl, key) -> CallContext Create a new call context.    

> plan(ctx) -> Plan

Create an executable plan with a context.    

> Plan.on_worker(worker) -> PlanStepBuilder

Build a new plan step on a TensorCast worker.    

> Plan.on_instance(inst) -> PlanStepBuilder

Build a new plan step on an instance.    

> Plan.run(concurrency) -> PlanResult

Execute the plan with specified concurrency. Blocking. 

Worker prefetch(artifact, device) -> PlanStep Transfer an Artifact replica to the worker on device .

Operation prefetch_many(artifacts, device) -> PlanStep Batched prefetch call.     

> pin(artifact, device) -> PlanStep

Pin an Artifact replica on the worker’s device .

Instance publish(req_id, ttl) -> PlanStep Flush a request’s KV cache to TensorCast. 

Operation manifest(req_id) -> PlanStep Get the set of Artifact s of a request’s KV cache.     

> hydrate(req_id, artifacts) -> PlanStep

Load a request’s KV caches into the instance.    

> evict(req_id) -> PlanStep

Evict a request’s KV caches on the instance.    

> transform_into(artifact, spec, target)

Transform the artifact tensor according to spec rule   

> -> PlanStep

and fill into the instance-owned target buffer. 

Signal connect(worker_addr) -> Runtime Connect to a worker and get a runtime.    

> list_instances() -> list[Instance]

List the statuses of all instances.    

> list_workers() -> list[Worker]

List the statuses of all TensorCast workers. 

Table 2: Overview of essential TensorCast programming APIs. 

placement, replication, and movement while preserving a stable interface for callers. Artifact s are immutable and maintain a canonical identity, including tensor metadata, for-mat, and content information, to deterministically identify tensor states. Callers introduce tensors into TensorCast un-der two ownership models: i) System-Owned. TensorCast assumes responsibility for the tensor lifecycle, which is suit-able for durable global tensors such as model weights; ii) Caller-Leased. Callers retain ownership while granting Ten-sorCast temporary management authority through a lease. This model supports transient but shareable tensors, such as KV caches during migration. 

Operation. Unlike general-purpose distributed frameworks that execute arbitrary user code ( e.g., Ray [25]), TensorCast exposes a finite but extensible set of tensor lifecycle opera-tions. This design provides a stable optimization boundary: callers define management policies by composing operations, while TensorCast controls their distributed execution. An operation carries a CallContext and behaves as a lazy han-dle that blocks only when callers explicitly await its result. The context contains a tracing ID, a deadline for maximum execution duration, and an idempotency key for reentrant retrying. Based on the execution location, operations are categorized into two types: i) Worker Operation. These op-erations operate entirely within the TaaS layer without in-teracting with computational logic. They manipulate tensor states inside TensorCast, such as processing tensors locally on a worker ( e.g., pin() ) or transferring replicas between workers ( e.g., prefetch() ); ii) Instance Operation. These op-erations interact with computation engines and manipulate engine-resident tensor states through instance callers. Repre-sentative examples include publishing a request’s KV cache into the TensorCast cluster as a set of Artifact s through  

> publish()

and loading them back through hydrate() , as well as transforming model weights and filling rank-specific VRAM parameter buffers through transform_into() . The instance adaptor residing within the execution instance im-plements these operations. 

Plan. It provides the composition abstraction for coordinat-ing multiple lifecycle operations across distributed workers and instances. Each operation in a plan corresponds to a 

> PlanStep

, and TensorCast maintains step dependencies through a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Callers initiate execution through run() , after which TensorCast executes 

> 6

operations according to the dependency graph and specified concurrency level. All operations within a plan share the same execution context. Consequently, TensorCast traces and retries a plan as an idempotent workflow using a unified ID and idempotency key. Plan allows callers to orchestrate complex tensor workflows without manually managing oper-ation ordering, synchronization, or failure handling. Tensor-Cast deliberately avoids distributed transaction semantics. A plan provides dependency ordering, tracing, deadline prop-agation, and idempotent retry, but does not provide ACID atomicity or rollback. Partially executed plans — such as a published KV cache or a prefetched replica — may remain and are reused, retried, or cleaned up according to operation semantics. This design matches LLM tensor lifecycles, which predominantly create immutable replicas, materialize ten-sor views, or move recomputable states without requiring general-purpose distributed transactions. 

Signal. It closes the policy loop by exposing runtime sta-tuses that callers need to make tensor management decisions. Instead of embedding placement or scheduling policies in-side TensorCast, the system provides observations that enable callers to implement adaptive management strategies. Prominent signals include list_workers() , which returns the status of individual workers such as memory and net-work pressure, and list_instances() , which returns the status of individual instances such as load level and the corre-sponding worker. By combining these runtime signals with the Plan abstraction, callers can formulate and execute di-verse tensor management policies while reusing the same underlying lifecycle mechanisms. 

## 3.3 Example: Programmable KV Cache Rebalancing 

List. 1 demonstrates how an application caller can implement a workload-specific tensor management policy by composing TensorCast lifecycle abstractions. The example implements a programmable KV cache rebalancing policy for distributed LLM serving, which jointly considers instance load and KV cache locality without modifying the underlying inference engine or KV cache backend. The caller first uses Signal APIs to observe the runtime states of serving instances and applies an external policy to select a request, together with the KV cache of its entire con-text, for migration between instances (lines 9–10). The caller then constructs a Plan with a CallContext to compose three lifecycle operations: (1) an instance operation publish() 

flushes the KV cache from the source instance into the Ten-sorCast cluster and registers the corresponding Artifact s; (2) a worker operation prefetch_many() optionally trans-fers the artifacts to the worker connected to the destination instance; and (3) an instance operation hydrate() material-izes the KV cache inside the destination inference engine. The prefetch step is optional because hydrate() can auto-matically fetch required artifacts once they are registered in TensorCast. This example highlights the programmability enabled by TensorCast: callers control tensor management policies, while TensorCast provides reusable mechanisms for tensor storage, movement, and materialization. The same programming model can be extended to other workload-specific tensor management strategies. We evaluate this light-weight caller-driven rebalancing policy in §6.4.                      

> 1import tensorcast as tc
> 23# Initialize the caller's TensorCast runtime
> 4rt = tc.connect(gateway_addr)
> 56def rebalance():
> 7# Choose to rebalance a request from inst1
> 8# to inst2 decided by a rebalancing policy
> 9instances = rt.signals().list_instances()
> 10 inst1, inst2, req_id = decide(instances)
> 11 12 # Perform KV cache migration with a Plan
> 13 ctx = tc.CallContext(id="tracing_id", deadline_ms=5000, idempotency_key="idem_key")
> 14 plan = tc.Plan(ctx)
> 15 # Flush request's KV cache as artifacts
> 16 # from inst1 into the cluster
> 17 flush_res = plan.on_instance(inst1).publish( req_id)
> 18 # Optionally prewarm all KV cache
> 19 # on the worker CPU DRAM connected by inst2
> 20 plan.on_worker(inst2.worker).prefetch_many( flush_res.artifact_result, device="cpu")
> 21 # Load request's KV cache into inst2
> 22 plan.on_instance(inst2).hydrate(req_id, flush_res.artifact_result)
> 23 # Execute the composed lifecycle workflow
> 24 plan.run(concurrency=1)

Listing 1: LLM router with request-level KV cache rebalancing with TensorCast APIs. Error-handling codes are emitted for simplicity. 

## 4 System Architecture 4.1 System Components 

The TensorCast runtime realizes the caller-worker pro-gramming model described in §3.1. As shown in Fig. 4, a Ten-sorCast cluster consists of worker nodes, instance nodes, and a lightweight global store (GS). Callers specify tensor management policies through TensorCast APIs, while work-ers execute lifecycle operations over distributed tensor states. Instance nodes provide the mechanism boundary between   

> 7❶
> Global Store Worker #2 Rebalancer App Worker #1 Caller Runtime Plan Executor
> Role: basic + gateway Role: basic + gateway
> Worker #N Plan Executor
> KV Role: basic + gateway
> Worker List Instance List Shard Leases Artifact Locations Plan Executor Worker #3
> Role: basic + home KV
> Plan Executor Instance B Caller Runtime Inference Engine KV Instance Adaptor Backend DB
> Tensor Ops. Plan caller-worker connection GS-worker heartbeat operation dispatch flow tensor transfer flow
> ❷❸❹❺❻❼❽
> !
> Instance A Caller Runtime Inference Engine KV Instance Adaptor

Figure 4: TensorCast system architecture. All com-ponents belong to the same TensorCast cluster ex-cept for the Req. Router App process. Steps 1 – 8 illus-trate the workflow of executing the KV migration task shown in List. 1 (line 12–23). See detailed explanation in §4.5. 

TensorCast and computation engines, allowing Tensor-Cast to manage engine-resident tensors without embedding workload-specific policies into the execution layer. 

Worker. A worker is the fundamental execution unit of TensorCast, responsible for maintaining tensor states and executing lifecycle operations. Rather than deploying sepa-rate services for storage, workflow execution, and metadata management, TensorCast composes worker functionalities through different roles . Currently, three roles exist: i) Basic. Aworker with the basic role contributes its memory and disk resources to the unified tensor pool (§4.2). It also maintains a local plan executor for processing worker-local plan steps (e.g., artifact prefetch() ) dispatched from other workers, but does not directly receive plans from callers. All Ten-sorCast workers operate with the basic role at minimum. 

ii) Gateway. Gateway workers provide the entry point for callers to submit lifecycle workflows. They maintain caller connections, resolve plan-step dependencies, and dispatch operations to corresponding workers or instances for exe-cution. In practice, gateway workers can share a common routable address behind a load balancer to provide scalable ac-cess to external callers. iii) Shard Home. For high-cardinality tensors such as KV caches, TensorCast partitions tensor states into multiple shards (§4.2). Workers with the shard home role maintain the ownership and consistency invari-ants of specific shards. This composable role architecture separates different lifecycle responsibilities while preserv-ing a unified worker abstraction. It simplifies configuration, deployment, and monitoring of heterogeneous worker re-sources ( e.g., assigning high-performance nodes as KV cache shard homes) and allows TensorCast to introduce new life-cycle capabilities through additional worker roles. 

Instance. Instance nodes implement the mechanism bound-ary between TensorCast and computation engines. A typi-cal instance node runs an LLM execution engine ( e.g., an in-ference or training framework) and contains a TensorCast caller runtime that connects to a gateway worker. Tensor-Cast integrates with the execution engine through an In-stance Adaptor , which implements the minimal interfaces re-quired to export, import, or transform engine-resident tensor states. This separation ensures that instance integration fixes only the underlying tensor management mechanisms, while workload-specific policies remain programmable through callers. Consequently, new tensor management strategies can evolve without repeatedly modifying execution engines or backend implementations. 

Global Store. TensorCast uses a Global Store (GS) as a lightweight control-plane metadata service rather than a component in the tensor data path. The GS maintains cluster metadata, including worker and instance status, the replica locations of low-cardinality tensors (§4.2), and shard ownership information. To avoid introducing a centralized bottleneck, workers cache metadata locally and refresh it through update exchanges with the GS. Therefore, most tensor management workflows bypass the GS and execute directly among workers and instances. The GS additionally serves as the entry point for cluster observability, including workload monitoring and runtime metrics. 

## 4.2 Unified Tensor Pool 

The unified tensor pool realizes the Artifact abstraction by separating logical tensor identity from physical tensor residency. Although callers interact with stable Artifact 

handles, TensorCast dynamically manages concrete ten-sor replicas across workers, devices, and storage tiers. Since different tensor states exhibit different lifecycle characteris-tics, TensorCast adopts different management policies for 

low-cardinality and high-cardinality tensors. 

Low-Cardinality Tensors. Some tensors in LLM workloads are immutable, durable, and accessed relatively infrequently. Representative examples include static model weights, which typically have a small number of tensor identities but large data sizes. We classify such tensors as low-cardinality ten-sors. Since their metadata changes infrequently, TensorCast maintains their replica locations centrally through the GS. During operations involving low-cardinality tensors, work-ers query the GS to locate available replicas. For example, an inference instance may load a Qwen3.5 model from local stor-age and introduce the weights into the tensor pool through  

> 8put(weights, "Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B")

. TensorCast cre-ates an Artifact replica on a worker, or directly generates a CUDA IPC handle when the worker and instance reside on the same host. Subsequent instances initializing the same model can obtain the corresponding Artifact and material-ize the weights through tensor() , fetching replicas from the original worker or nearby workers populated through prior  

> prefetch()

operations. In practice, a newly launched infer-ence instance is typically deployed together with a co-host or nearby TensorCast gateway worker, allowing model weights to be shared with CUDA IPC or transferred through GPU Direct RDMA. Because low-cardinality tensors contain few distinct metadata entries and incur infrequent metadata accesses, centralized metadata management through the GS does not become a scalability bottleneck. 

High-Cardinality Tensors. In contrast, other tensor states exhibit high cardinality: they contain many fragmented ob-jects, are frequently created and reused, and require dy-namic placement decisions. KV caches are a representative example. Inference engines continuously generate and con-sume KV cache blocks or pages, making them significantly more dynamic than model weights. Maintaining the loca-tions of all such tensors directly in the GS would introduce excessive metadata traffic. To address this challenge, Ten-sorCast partitions high-cardinality tensors into shards and assigns each shard to a worker with the shard home role. The shard home worker maintains the ownership and con-sistency invariants of its shard. To prevent split-brain owner-ship during worker failures or network partitions, Tensor-Cast associates each shard with a shard lease containing the shard home worker, expiration time, and a monotonically increasing fencing token. Assume 𝑁 shards exist. For a given 

shard _id ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , 𝑁 − 1}, workers with the shard home role compute their ranks using Highest Random Weight [54] hashing: rank = HRW (shard _id , worker _id ). The top-𝑘 

workers for each shard (we use 𝑘 = 3 in our implementation to guarantee lease acquisition and reduce contention) com-pete to acquire the corresponding shard lease through the GS. The GS grants the lease to the first arriving worker and remains responsible only for lease metadata, while workers cache lease records locally. Shard home workers periodically renew leases through heartbeat messages. During worker or network failures, an expired lease triggers a new owner-ship acquisition process. After a new shard home worker acquires the lease, the fencing token increases, invalidat-ing operations from stale workers because all workers reject high-cardinality tensor operations carrying outdated fencing tokens. This lease-based design distributes tensor metadata management across workers and limits GS operations to shard number 𝑁 , rather than per-tensor queries, allowing TensorCast to scale to high-frequency tensor state queries. 

## 4.3 Distributed Plan Execution 

TensorCast executes the Plan abstraction in a distributed manner, allowing callers to compose tensor lifecycle work-flows without introducing a centralized execution bottleneck. Rather than maintaining a global operation scheduler, Ten-sorCast distributes plan execution across workers, where each worker locally executes lifecycle operations assigned to it. A single operation is represented as a one-step plan, providing a unified execution path for all tensor workflows. 

Worker-Local Plan Execution. Callers submit plans to a connected gateway worker and do not manage distributed execution logic locally. The gateway worker coordinates plan execution by resolving step dependencies and dispatching individual operations to corresponding workers or instances. This design keeps caller programs lightweight while main-taining a clean boundary between TensorCast system and the caller SDK. Each worker maintains a local plan execu-tor that supports three execution responsibilities: i) Execute worker-local operations, such as pinning tensor replica res-idency or transferring replicas between workers through 

> prefetch()

; ii) Invoke instance adaptors to execute opera-tions that interact with engine-resident tensor states, such as publishing or hydrating KV caches; iii) Maintain plan exe-cution progress, including dependency resolution, operation dispatch, retry handling, and result propagation. Gateway workers provide this coordination functionality for caller-submitted plans. At the control plane, workers discover each other through worker metadata cached from the GS and com-municate through RPCs. At the data plane, tensor contents bypass the GS and are transferred directly between workers and instances through high-performance communication paths, such as P2P RDMA when available. 

## 4.4 Lifecycle Consistency and Fault Tolerance 

TensorCast adopts fault tolerance mechanisms that pre-serve tensor lifecycle semantics under failures. Different tensor states follow different recovery strategies: durable low-cardinality tensors rely on persistent replicas, while high-cardinality tensors rely on distributed shard ownership and lease-based consistency. 

Worker Failover. Workers maintain cached execution meta-data, while persistent metadata remains recoverable from the GS. Following a worker failure, recovered workers recon-struct transient caches, such as worker and instance lists, and reacquire shard leases from the GS. Low-cardinality tensor replicas remain available if their physical replicas survive or reside on persistent storage. In contrast, high-cardinality tensors whose shard leases expire are considered unavailable until they are reconstructed or republished. 

> 9

Global Store Failover. The GS maintains persistent meta-data required for cluster coordination, including worker sta-tus, replica information, and shard ownership. This metadata is committed to a backend database for durability. In pro-duction deployments, standard replication mechanisms such as state machine replication ( e.g., Paxos [55], Raft [56]) or chain replication [57, 58] can provide GS availability. 

## 4.5 Putting Everything Together 

We use the programmable KV cache rebalancing example from List. 1 (lines 12–23) to illustrate how TensorCast re-alizes a complete tensor lifecycle workflow. As Fig. 4 illus-trates, the rebalancer application, instance A, and instance B connect to workers 1, 2, and 𝑁 , respectively. When the application caller invokes plan.run() , the plan is submitted to worker 1, which acts as the gateway worker responsible for coordinating execution ( 1 ). To execute the publish() 

operation on instance A, worker 1 dispatches the correspond-ing plan step to worker 2, which is connected to instance A ( 2 ). The plan executor on worker 2 invokes the instance adaptor inside instance A to export the engine-resident KV cache ( 3 ). The instance adaptor retrieves the KV cache from the inference engine, determines the corresponding shard, locates the shard home worker 3 using the locally cached shard lease, and transfers the KV cache to worker 3 ( 4 ). After the KV cache is registered as Artifact s in Tensor-Cast, worker 1 dispatches the optional prefetch_many() 

operation to worker 𝑁 ( 5 ). Worker 𝑁 uses its local lease information to locate the shard home worker 3 and transfers the required KV replicas locally ( 6 ). Finally, worker 𝑁 in-vokes the instance adaptor inside instance B ( 7 ) to execute 

> hydrate()

, which materializes the KV cache back into the destination inference engine ( 8 ). The entire data path is distributed across workers and instances without GS, and the GS remains responsible only for control-plane metadata such as shard ownership and leases. 

## 5 Implementation 

We implement TensorCast as a distributed C++ runtime with a Python SDK. The runtime consists of approximately 160K lines of C++ code, while the SDK contains approxi-mately 95K lines of Python code. We highlight key imple-mentation details of tensor materialization, data transfer, and LLM framework integration below. The implementa-tion is publicly available at https://github.com/tensorcast-ai/tensorcast. 

Runtime Implementation. The TensorCast runtime is implemented as a distributed C++ service. Workers commu-nicate through gRPC and maintain tensor replicas across CPU memory, GPU memory, and local storage. The global store is implemented as a Python gRPC service backed by DuckDB [59], maintaining control-plane metadata including worker status, artifact indices, replica locations, and shard leases. Workers do not access the global store during tensor data transfer. Instead, they cache required metadata locally and execute operations through the distributed plan runtime. Worker liveness and metadata consistency are maintained through heartbeat and reconciliation RPCs. 

Tensor Materialization and Transfer. To realize Artifact materialization efficiently, workers implement a streaming pipeline that resolves tensor metadata, allocates target mem-ory, transfers tensor contents from local storage or remote workers, verifies integrity, and exports device-specific han-dles to callers. GPU-resident tensors on the same host are ex-posed through CUDA IPC to avoid unnecessary data copies. For inter-worker tensor movement, TensorCast uses RDMA when possible and falls back to a multi-connection TCP transport based on userspace mTCP [60]. GPU transfers use pinned streaming buffers and asynchronous CUDA streams to overlap data movement with execution. 

Programming Interface. The Python SDK provides the programming interface used by application callers and in-stance callers. It exposes TensorCast abstractions through a PyTorch-compatible interface and communicates with local workers through protobuf-generated gRPC stubs. The SDK manages caller-side runtime state, including session con-text, deadlines, retries, metadata caching, and the lifecycle of returned shared-memory handles. The SDK deliberately does not communicate directly with the global store, pre-serving the separation between application programs and the TensorCast control plane. 

## 6 TensorCast Showcases & Evaluation 

We evaluate TensorCast to answer two questions: i) whether a unified tensor lifecycle layer can provide efficient mech-anisms comparable to specialized tensor management sys-tems; and ii) whether its programmable abstractions enable new tensor management policies through composition of life-cycle primitives. We integrate TensorCast with mainstream inference engines, vLLM [18] and SGLang [19], and evaluate four representative scenarios: model weight materialization (§6.1), model weight synchronization (§6.2), KV cache man-agement (§6.3), and programmable request routing (§6.4). The first three scenarios evaluate the efficiency of Tensor-Cast’s reusable tensor lifecycle mechanisms, while the last demonstrates the programmability enabled by composing these mechanisms into a workload-specific policy. 

## 6.1 Model Weight Materialization 

We evaluate TensorCast’s ability to materialize large low-cardinality tensor states during elastic LLM serving by inte-grating it into vLLM as a model weight loading module.       

> 10 JFS SSD tmpfs Storage Type 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Time (s) 1.3k 39.5 11.5 211 11.0 4.31 20.7 10.7 3.35 0.345 0.345 0.367 Default InstantTensor TensorCast cold TensorCast warm

(a) Weight load time. JFS SSD tmpfs Storage Type 10 2       

> 10 3
> Time (s) 1.3k 72.2 42.4 246 42.8 35.3 45.3 35.0 26.9 24.2 24.3 23.7 Default InstantTensor TensorCast cold TensorCast warm

(b) End-to-end ready time. 

Figure 5: Instance launch time for Qwen3-30B-A3B model. JFS SSD tmpfs Storage Type 10 0   

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Time (s) 5.7k 265 83.1 985 72.0 13.5 148 76.8 18.2 0.498 0.587 0.696 Default InstantTensor TensorCast cold TensorCast warm

(a) Weight load time. JFS SSD tmpfs Storage Type 10 2    

> 10 3
> 10 4
> Time (s) 5.7k 299 116 1.0k 106 46.9 181 112 52.2 25.0 26.1 24.9 Default InstantTensor TensorCast cold TensorCast warm

(b) End-to-end ready time. 

Figure 6: Instance launch time for Qwen3-235B-A22B model. 1 2 4TP Size   

> 0510 15 20
> Update Time (s) 2.00x 1.81x 1.61x Default TensorCast

(a) Qwen3-14B. 1 2 4TP Size   

> 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40
> Update Time (s) 1.14x 1.66x 2.63x Default TensorCast

(b) Qwen3-32B. 

Figure 7: Model weight synchronization time. Setup. We use a single node with 64 CPUs, 500 GB DRAM, and 8 × H800 GPUs to launch a vLLM instance (TP=8). This setup emulates a MaaS auto-scaling scenario, where new instances are launched as quickly as possible. We load model weights in safetensors format from three storage types: i) 

a high-performance distributed file system (JuiceFS [61]); ii) 

node-local SSD; and iii) node-local DRAM (tmpfs). Given a model path on each storage type, the vLLM instance material-izes weights through four configurations: i) Default , vLLM’s native weight loader; ii) InstantTensor [62], a fast weight loader with pipelined and zero-copy I/O; iii) TensorCast cold , where a TensorCast worker reads rank-specific weight slices from storage and materializes them into VRAM, after which the vLLM process consumes the tensors through the 

tensor_dict API; and iv) TensorCast warm , where weight slices are pre-materialized locally through the prefetch API and vLLM directly consumes the materialized tensors. This design exploits TensorCast’s separation between tensor lifecycle management and execution initialization, allowing tensor materialization to occur concurrently with instance launch or during a pre-flight stage. 

Results. We report both the model weight loading time dur-ing instance launch and the end-to-end instance-ready time to evaluate how TensorCast accelerates instance initializa-tion. As shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, TensorCast consistently outperforms all baselines across settings. In particular, un-der JFS, a common case where MaaS providers host model weights, for the Qwen3-30B-A3B model, TensorCast-cold reduces model weight loading time by 60.7 × and 10.2 × com-pared to Default and InstantTensor, respectively (Fig. 5a). Consequently, it reduces end-to-end launch-ready time by 28.5 × and 5.4 ×, respectively (Fig. 5b). These gains stem from two factors: i) TensorCast concurrently reads slice views for each rank while also issuing parallel read streams for each rank’s assigned slice; and ii) tensor transfers to VRAM are pipelined to hide H2D copy overhead. For TensorCast-warm, vLLM consumes pre-materialized tensors in less than 1 second, as TensorCast uses CUDA IPC to enable zero-copy access. As a result, end-to-end launch time is only domi-nated by runtime initialization overhead, yielding 228.6 × and 40.7 × speedups over Default and InstantTensor, respectively, for the Qwen3-235B-A22B model (Fig. 6b). These results demonstrate that TensorCast can efficiently materialize large immutable tensor states while preserving a general tensor management abstraction. 

11 2 4 8Node Number 020 40 60 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast (a) 16k prompt w/ RDMA. 2 4 8Node Number 200   

> 100
> 0TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast

(b) 16k prompt w/o RDMA. 2 4 8Node Number 025 50 75 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast (c) 35k prompt w/ RDMA. 2 4 8Node Number 50   

> 25
> 025 50 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast

(d) 35k prompt w/o RDMA. 

Figure 8: Qwen3-32B TTFT redcution ratio with TensorCast and Mooncake KV storage backend. 2 4Node Number 010 20 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast 

(a) 16k prompt w/ RDMA. 2 4Node Number 150   

> 100
> 50
> 0TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast

(b) 16k prompt w/o RDMA. 2 4Node Number 010 20 30 40 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast (c) 35k prompt w/ RDMA. 2 4Node Number 30   

> 20
> 10
> 010 20 TTFT Reduction (%)  Mooncake TensorCast

(d) 35k prompt w/o RDMA. 

Figure 9: Qwen3-235B-A22B TTFT reduction ratio with TensorCast and Mooncake KV backend storage. 

## 6.2 Model Weight Synchronization 

We evaluate TensorCast’s ability to synchronize versioned tensor states across distributed LLM instances by integrating it into SGLang as a new model weight updating module. 

Setup. The experimental setup consists of a two-node clus-ter, where each node runs a TensorCast worker with 64 CPUs, 500 GB DRAM, and 4 × H800 GPUs. We use the  

> WeightPublisher

helper provided by TensorCast, which wraps the put() API to publish different versions of model weights into a TensorCast worker on one node. A serv-ing SGLang instance on another node synchronizes model weights by retrieving tensors from the TensorCast cluster. This setup represents the training-serving synchronization pattern commonly seen in RL post-training, where a trainer publishes updated model weights and rollout workers period-ically synchronize their parameters. During synchronization, each tensor-parallel (TP) rank retrieves only its correspond-ing tensor slice through the view() API, demonstrating Ten-sorCast’s ability to materialize different tensor layouts from a shared tensor state. To ensure a fair comparison against the 

Default baseline, which retrieves full model weights from JFS through a file path, we disable RDMA for TensorCast. 

Results. As shown in Fig. 7, TensorCast accelerates model weight synchronization by 1.14 × to 2.63 × compared with the default updater. The acceleration trends vary with TP size and model scale. For the Qwen3-14B model, increas-ing TP size introduces additional tensor slicing overhead on the TensorCast worker, which becomes the dominant cost compared with tensor transfer. In contrast, for the larger Qwen3-32B model, TensorCast benefits from concurrently transferring multiple tensor views, better utilizing available network bandwidth and achieving higher acceleration as TP size increases. These results demonstrate that Tensor-Cast can efficiently manage versioned tensor states across distributed execution instances while allowing different con-sumers to materialize the tensor representations required by their parallelism configurations. 

## 6.3 High-Cardinality Tensor Management 

We evaluate TensorCast’s ability to manage high-cardinality tensor states by integrating it into SGLang’s HiCache mod-ule [12] as a KV cache storage backend. Each KV page is represented as a high-cardinality Artifact , with KV pages distributed across TensorCast workers. 

Setup. The experimental setup consists of an 𝑁 -node cluster, where each node is equipped with 64 CPU, 1TB DRAM, 8 

× H800 GPUs, and 200 Gbps RDMA links. We deploy one TensorCast worker and one SGLang instance on each node. To evaluate KV reuse, we first send prompts from the Long-Bench dataset [63] to a single instance, and subsequently resend the same prompts to all other instances in the cluster simultaneously. This workload forces 𝑁 − 1 instances to con-currently retrieve KV pages from the TensorCast cluster, guaranteeing a 100% cache hit rate and stress-testing high-cardinality tensor retrieval. We group prompts into short and long categories, with approximately 16k and 35k tokens on average, respectively. We compare TensorCast against the 

> 12

Preset 𝜇 𝜎 Median Mean P5 P95 Represents 

fast 2.1 0.6 8.2 s 9.8 s 3.0 s 22.0 s Tight coding-agent loop; short tool replies dominate medium 3.0 0.8 20.1 s 27.7 s 5.4 s 75.0 s Typical SWE agent with mixed view, edit, and tool execution slow 4.1 1.0 60.3 s 99.5 s 11.6 s 311 s Long-tool-dominated workflows; research/planning agents 

Table 3: The three inter-turn delay presets used by the LogNorm sampling within a session. state-of-the-art Mooncake [9] integration in SGLang under identical settings. Mooncake represents a highly optimized KV-centric system, allowing us to evaluate whether Ten-sorCast’s general tensor lifecycle abstraction introduces performance overhead compared with a specialized KV man-agement design. 

Results. We measure the average TTFT reduction of the subsequent 𝑁 − 1 instances relative to the first instance to evaluate the effectiveness of KV reuse. We also evaluate RDMA-disabled settings, since KV pages are increasingly transferred across clusters or datacenters without RDMA interconnects [64]. For the Qwen3-32B model with TP=2, as shown in Fig. 8, with RDMA enabled (Fig. 8a and Fig. 8c), TensorCast achieves performance comparable to Moon-cake, with TTFT reductions ranging from 60% to 87.5% ( i.e., 

2.5 × to 8 × speedup). Performance improves as the number of nodes 𝑁 increases because TensorCast distributes high-cardinality tensor states across shard homes rather than centralizing metadata management through the global store (§4.2). With RDMA disabled (Fig. 8b and Fig. 8d), Tensor-Cast significantly outperforms Mooncake while maintaining positive TTFT reductions. This improvement comes from TensorCast’s userspace mTCP implementation [60] with multipath transmission, which reduces kernel copy overhead and aggregates higher effective bandwidth compared with in-kernel TCP. For the Qwen3-235B model with TP=8, as shown in Fig. 9, TensorCast again achieves comparable per-formance to Mooncake under RDMA and better performance without RDMA. Compared with TP=2, TP=8 introduces 4 ×

more concurrent KV page retrieval requests, increasing con-tention and reducing TTFT improvements for both systems. These results demonstrate that TensorCast can efficiently manage highly dynamic, high-cardinality tensor states while preserving the performance of specialized KV cache systems. 

## 6.4 Programmable Request Router 

We evaluate TensorCast’s programmability by implement-ing a workload-specific request routing policy that composes multiple tensor lifecycle operations. We integrate an instance adaptor into SGLang, enabling callers to execute the instance operations listed in Tab. 2 on SGLang instances. 

Setup. Based on the widely used cache-aware routing policy, we implement a lightweight rebalancing policy that periodi-cally observes instance states and migrates selected requests, together with their KV caches, from the most-loaded in-stance to the least-loaded instance using the Plan abstraction shown in List. 1 (see detailed rebalancing policy in §A). This combined policy aims to preserve KV cache locality while avoiding load imbalance across instances, without losing con-text during migration. The rebalancing policy is independent of TensorCast and can be customized without modifying the SGLang scheduler, KV cache backend, or TensorCast runtime. We compare the TensorCast router against three baseline routers implemented in the SGLang model gate-way [65]: i) a pure load-aware router using the widely used power-of-two-choices policy [66]; ii) a load-aware router with Mooncake as the backend for sharing KV caches across instances; and iii) a pure cache-aware router that routes re-quests to instances with the longest local prefix match. The cluster consists of four nodes, each equipped with 2 × H20 GPUs. Each node runs one Qwen3-32B instance with TP=2. 

Workloads. We generate dynamic multi-turn workloads from real agent rollouts on the SWE-Gym task pool, col-lected by running the OpenHands agent on approximately 2,400 real-world Python repository tasks [67]. We treat each rollout trajectory as a multi-turn request session and main-tain concurrent sessions as workload traffic to the cluster. The interval between consecutive requests within a session is sampled from a LogNormal distribution, since this right-skewed distribution reflects human-action intervals [68, 69]. We use three LogNormal parameter presets–fast, medium, and slow–with parameters (𝜇, 𝜎 ) as described in Tab. 3. 

Results. We measure the median TTFT of all requests across all instances and report the results in Fig. 10. As the num-ber of concurrent user sessions increases, the median TTFT increases rapidly for all methods. However, the rebalancing policy implemented by composing TensorCast lifecycle APIs achieves the lowest median TTFT across all workloads. Specifically, under the heaviest loads, 128 sessions for fast 

and 256 sessions for medium and slow , the TensorCast router reduces median TTFT by 71.4%, 93.2%, and 70.4% for 

fast , medium , and slow , respectively, compared with the load-aware router using Mooncake. We also report the average cache hit rate in Fig. 11. As the number of concurrent user 

> 13

4 8 16 32 64 128 Session Number (a) Agent fast 10 3

10 4

> TTFT P50 (ms)

4 8 16 32 64 128 256 Session Number (b) Agent medium 10 3

10 4

4 8 16 32 64 128 256 Session Number (c) Agent slow 10 3

10 4

Load-aware Load-aware + Mooncake Cache-aware TensorCast Figure 10: Request TTFT against different router policies with three levels of agentic coding workloads. 4 8 16 32 64 128 Session Number (a) Agent fast 50 60 70 80 90 100 Cache Hit Rate (%) 

4 8 16 32 64 128 256 Session Number (b) Agent medium 50 60 70 80 90 100 

4 8 16 32 64 128 256 Session Number (c) Agent slow 50 60 70 80 90 100 

Load-aware Load-aware + Mooncake Cache-aware TensorCast 

Figure 11: Request cache hit rate against different router policies with three levels of agentic coding workloads. 

sessions increases, the cache hit rate decreases for all meth-ods due to limited local cache capacity on each instance and Mooncake overload. In contrast, the TensorCast router exhibits the smallest hit-rate drop by jointly balancing KV cache placement and instance load while preserving requests from the same session on cache-hitting instances. This behav-ior effectively reduces request TTFT. These results validate the programmability of TensorCast: developers can com-pose tensor lifecycle primitives to implement new optimiza-tion policies that coordinate request scheduling and tensor placement, without modifying existing serving components. 

## 7 Discussion 

Applicability beyond inference workloads. While our integration and evaluations in §6 focus on inference work-loads, TensorCast can also express tensor lifecycles in train-ing workloads: At the abstraction level, checkpoints can be mapped to versioned, system-owned Artifact s, with view() 

and transform_into() expressing rank-specific resharding; gradients, optimizer states, and long-lived activations can be exposed as caller-leased tensors. We leave the integration of TensorCast with training frameworks like Megatron-LM [70] and DeepSpeed [71] for future work. 

Integration cost and abstraction overhead. Decoupling tensor management does not remove engine-specific integra-tion: TensorCast confines the export, import, or transforma-tion of engine-resident tensor states to an instance adaptor, so customized programs can evolve in callers without repeat-edly modifying engines, transports, or storage backends. We do not claim that a general abstraction is inherently faster than every specialized implementation. §6.1–§6.3 evaluate reusable mechanisms and show that TensorCast achieves comparable or better performance, while §6.4 shows opti-mization enabled by composition. 

## 8 Other Related Work 

In addition to the studies for efficient tensor management discussed in §2.1, many other studies have investigated opti-mizations for LLM workloads. 

Efficient LLM inference. An increasing body of literature focuses on enhancing the efficiency of Transformer-based LLM inference. These optimizations encompass parallelism [72–74], request scheduling [75–77], memory management 

> 14

[44, 78, 79], quantization [80, 81], and specialized GPU ker-nels [82, 83]. Serving as a complementary approach, Ten-sorCast offers flexible, large-scale tensor management and integrates seamlessly with these existing techniques. 

Programmable LLM systems. Numerous studies explore the programming of LLM behaviors. One line of research targets frameworks for prompt engineering and agent orches-tration, including LangChain [84], LangFlow [85], AutoGen [86], and DSPy [87]. These tools simplify agentic workflows to accelerate LLM application development. Another direc-tion provides fine-grained control over the LLM inference process–encompassing tokenization, attention, KV cache management, and decoding–through systems like microserv-ing LLM [88] and PIE [47]. However, existing programmable LLM systems operate primarily at the execution layer of LLM workloads. In contrast, TensorCast introduces pro-grammable management of the data lifecycle ( i.e., tensors), making it an orthogonal and complementary approach to current frameworks. 

## 9 Conclusion Remarks 

As LLM systems continue to evolve toward increasingly dynamic and stateful workloads, efficient tensor lifecycle management becomes a fundamental infrastructure chal-lenge beyond individual optimization techniques. Tensor-Cast introduces the missing tensor management layer by decoupling tensor states from the computation that produces and consumes them, enabling tensors to be managed as pro-grammable, first-class system resources. Through lifecycle primitives and a distributed runtime, TensorCast achieves the efficiency of specialized tensor management mechanisms while allowing developers to compose new workload-specific policies. Our results demonstrate that future LLM infrastruc-ture should not only optimize computation over tensors, but also provide programmable control over the lifecycle of the tensor states that drive these computations. 

## References 

[1] Kimi k3: Open frontier intelligence. https://www.kimi.com/blog/kimi-k3. (Accessed on 07/23/2026). [2] Yao Fu, Leyang Xue, Yeqi Huang, Andrei-Octavian Brabete, Dmitrii Ustiugov, Yuvraj Patel, and Luo Mai. ServerlessLLM: Low-Latency serverless inference for large language models. In USENIX OSDI , 2024. [3] Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Zhixia Liu, Yulong He, Yuetao Chen, Hao Xu, Jiang Liu, Baoquan Zhang, Shining Wan, Gengyuan Dan, et al. Deep-flow: Serverless large language model serving at scale. arXiv e-prints ,pages arXiv–2501, 2025. [4] Minchen Yu, Ao Wang, Dong Chen, Haoxuan Yu, Xiaonan Luo, Zhuo-hao Li, Wei Wang, Ruichuan Chen, Dapeng Nie, and Haoran Yang. Faaswap: Slo-aware, gpu-efficient serverless inference via model swap-ping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03622 , 2023. [5] Minchen Yu, Rui Yang, Chaobo Jia, Zhaoyuan Su, Sheng Yao, Tingfeng Lan, Yuchen Yang, Yue Cheng, Wei Wang, Ao Wang, et al. {\ lambda }

scale: Enabling fast scaling for serverless large language model infer-ence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09922 , 2025. [6] Dingyan Zhang, Haotian Wang, Yang Liu, Xingda Wei, Yizhou Shan, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. BlitzScale: Fast and Live Large Model Autoscaling with O (1) Host Caching. In USENIX OSDI , 2025. [7] Chiheng Lou, Sheng Qi, Chao Jin, Dapeng Nie, Haoran Yang, Yu Ding, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Hydraserve: Minimizing cold start latency for serverless llm serving in public clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15524 ,2025. [8] Let Tensors Fly — Accelerating Large Model Weight Loading with R-Fork. https://lmsys.org/blog/2025-12-10-rfork/. (Accessed on 01/28/2026). [9] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Mooncake: Trad-ing more storage for less computation—a KVCache-centric architecture for serving LLM chatbot. In USENIX FAST , 2025. [10] Anonymous. Dualmap: Enabling both cache affinity and load bal-ancing for distributed LLM serving. In Submitted to The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. under re-view. [11] Yuhan Liu, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaot-ing Feng, Yuyang Huang, Samuel Shen, Rui Zhang, Kuntai Du, et al. Lmcache: An efficient kv cache layer for enterprise-scale llm inference. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09665 , 2025. [12] SGLang HiCache. https://lmsys.org/blog/2025-09-10-sglang-hicache/. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). [13] Lingfan Yu, Jinkun Lin, and Jinyang Li. Stateful large language model serving with pensieve. In ACM EuroSys , 2025. [14] Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. Cacheblend: Fast large language model serving for rag with cached knowledge fusion. In 

ACM EuroSys , 2025. [15] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic, Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. Cost-Efficient large language model serving for multi-turn conversations with Cache-dAttention. In USENIX ATC , 2024. [16] Borui Wan, Mingji Han, Yiyao Sheng, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, Mo-fan Zhang, Zhichao Lai, Menghan Yu, Junda Zhang, Zuquan Song, et al. {ByteCheckpoint }: A unified checkpointing system for large foundation model development. In USENIX NSDI , 2025. [17] Moonshot checkpoint engine. https://github.com/MoonshotAI/chec kpoint-engine. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). [18] vLLM: The High-Throughput and Memory-Efficient inference and serving engine for LLMs. https://vllm.ai/. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). 15 [19] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Livia Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37:62557–62583, 2024. [20] Tensorrt-llm. https://nvidia.github.io/TensorRT-LLM/. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). [21] NVIDIA DGX SuperPOD: Next Generation Scalable Infras-tructure for AI Leadership. https://docs.nvidia.com/dgx-superpod/reference-architecture/scalable-infrastructure-h200/latest/_downloads/bbd08041e98eb913619944ead1f92373/RA-11336-001-DSPH200-ReferenceArch.pdf#page=8.10. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). [22] Redis – Your App is about to get faster. https://redis.io/. (Accessed on 01/22/2026). [23] Wenyuan Yu, Tao He, Lei Wang, Ke Meng, Ye Cao, Diwen Zhu, Sanhong Li, and Jingren Zhou. Vineyard: Optimizing data sharing in data-intensive analytics. Proc. ACM Manag. Data , 1(2), jun 2023. [24] Ray Plasma. https://github.com/ray-project/plasma. (Accessed on 01/22/2026). [25] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I Jordan, et al. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging ai applications. In USENIX OSDI 18 , 2018. [26] Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Tathagata Das, Ankur Dave, Justin Ma, Murphy McCauly, Michael J Franklin, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. Resilient distributed datasets: A Fault-Tolerant abstraction for In-Memory cluster computing. In USENIX NSDI , 2012. [27] Garrett McGrath and Paul R Brenner. Serverless computing: Design, implementation, and performance. In 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW) ,pages 405–410. IEEE, 2017. [28] Yanan Yang, Laiping Zhao, Yiming Li, Huanyu Zhang, Jie Li, Mingyang Zhao, Xingzhen Chen, and Keqiu Li. Infless: a native serverless system for low-latency, high-throughput inference. In ACM ASPLOS , 2022. [29] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [30] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. [31] Zhisheng Hu, Jiacheng Shen, and Ming-Chang Yang. Flexkv: Flexible index offloading for memory-disaggregated key-value store. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16148 , 2025. [32] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. {DistServe }: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving. In 

USENIX OSDI , 2024. [33] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. Splitwise: Efficient genera-tive llm inference using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) , pages 118– 132. IEEE, 2024. [34] Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Liangliang Xu, Xusheng Chen, Jiang Xu, Shuang Chen, Hao Feng, Chenxi Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao, et al. Inference without interference: Disaggregate llm inference for mixed downstream workloads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11181 , 2024. [35] Foteini Strati, Sara Mcallister, Amar Phanishayee, Jakub Tarnawski, and Ana Klimovic. D\’ej \avu: Kv-cache streaming for fast, fault-tolerant generative llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01876 , 2024. [36] In Gim, Guojun Chen, Seung-seob Lee, Nikhil Sarda, Anurag Khan-delwal, and Lin Zhong. Prompt cache: Modular attention reuse for low-latency inference. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems ,6:325–338, 2024. [37] Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Yihua Cheng, Siddhant Ray, Yuyang Huang, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Shan Lu, Ganesh Anantha-narayanan, et al. Cachegen: Kv cache compression and streaming for fast large language model serving. In ACM SIGCOMM , 2024. [38] Chao Jin, Zili Zhang, Xuanlin Jiang, Fangyue Liu, Shufan Liu, Xu-anzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Ragcache: Efficient knowledge caching for retrieval-augmented generation. ACM Transactions on Computer Sys-tems , 44(1):1–27, 2025. [39] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic, Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. Attentionstore: Cost-effective attention reuse across multi-turn conversations in large language model serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19708 , 52:20–38, 2024. [40] Megatron Team. Dist checkpointing package. https: //docs.nvidia.com/megatron-core/developer-guide/latest/api-guide/dist_checkpointing.html. (Accessed on 01/26/2026). [41] PyTorch Team. Getting started with Distributed Check- point (DCP). https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/distributed_checkpo int_recipe.html. (Accessed on 01/26/2026). [42] Xinyu Lian, Sam Ade Jacobs, Lev Kurilenko, Masahiro Tanaka, Stas Bekman, Olatunji Ruwase, and Minjia Zhang. Universal checkpointing: Efficient and flexible checkpointing for large scale distributed training. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18820 , 2024. [43] Dingyan Zhang, Jinbo Han, Kaixi Zhang, Xingda Wei, Sijie Shen, Chen-guang Fang, Wenyuan Yu, Jingren Zhou, and Rong Chen. Simple is better: Multiplication may be all you need for llm request scheduling. In USENIX OSDI , 2026. [44] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In ACM SOSP , 2023. [45] vllm – Automatic Prefix Caching. https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/desig n/prefix_caching/. (Accessed on 01/19/2026). [46] Fast and Expressive LLM Inference with RadixAttention and SGLang. https://lmsys.org/blog/2024-01-17-sglang/. (Accessed on 01/29/2026). [47] In Gim, Zhiyao Ma, Seung-seob Lee, and Lin Zhong. Pie: A pro-grammable serving system for emerging llm applications. In ACM SOSP , 2025. [48] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [49] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822, 2023. [50] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wain-wright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744, 2022. [51] Ruoyu Qin, Weiran He, Weixiao Huang, Yangkun Zhang, Yikai Zhao, Bo Pang, Xinran Xu, Yingdi Shan, Yongwei Wu, and Mingxing Zhang. Seer: Online context learning for fast synchronous llm reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14617 , 2025. [52] Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li, Chenjun Xiao, Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, et al. Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement learning with llms. arXiv preprint 

16 arXiv:2501.12599 , 2025. [53] Haoyuan Wu, Xueyi Chen, Rui Ming, Jilong Gao, Shoubo Hu, Zhuolun He, and Bei Yu. Totrl: Unlock llm tree-of-thoughts reasoning potential through puzzles solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12717 , 2025. [54] David G Thaler and Chinya V Ravishankar. Using name-based map-pings to increase hit rates. IEEE/ACM Transactions on networking ,6(1):1–14, 2002. [55] Leslie Lamport. Paxos made simple. ACM SIGACT News (Distributed Computing Column) 32, 4 (Whole Number 121, December 2001) , pages 51–58, 2001. [56] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. In search of an understandable consensus algorithm. In USENIX ATC , pages 305–319, 2014. [57] Robbert Van Renesse and Fred B Schneider. Chain replication for sup-porting high throughput and availability. In USENIX OSDI , volume 4, 2004. [58] Jeff Terrace and Michael J Freedman. Object storage on craq: High-throughput chain replication for read-mostly workloads. In USENIX ATC , 2009. [59] DuckDB – Run analytics where your data lives. https://duckdb.org/. (Accessed on 06/24/2026). [60] EunYoung Jeong, Shinae Wood, Muhammad Jamshed, Haewon Jeong, Sunghwan Ihm, Dongsu Han, and KyoungSoo Park. mtcp: a highly scalable user-level tcp stack for multicore systems. In USENIX NSDI ,2014. [61] JuiceFS. https://github.com/juicedata/juicefs. (Accessed on 06/24/2026). [62] InstentTensor. https://github.com/scitix/InstantTensor. (Accessed on 06/24/2026). [63] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, et al. Long-bench: A bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context understand-ing. In Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) , pages 3119–3137, 2024. [64] Ruoyu Qin, Weiran He, Yaoyu Wang, Zheming Li, Xinran Xu, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Mingxing Zhang. Prefill-as-a-service: Kvcache of next-generation models could go cross-datacenter. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15039 , 2026. [65] Sglang model gateway. https://docs.sglang.io/docs/advanced_feature s/sgl_model_gateway. (Accessed on 07/12/2026). [66] Michael Mitzenmacher. The power of two choices in randomized load balancing. IEEE transactions on parallel and distributed systems ,12(10):1094–1104, 2002. [67] Swe-gym/openhands-sampled-trajectories dataset. https://huggingf ace.co/datasets/SWE-Gym/OpenHands-Sampled-Trajectories. (Ac-cessed on 07/12/2026). [68] Lawrence Brown, Noah Gans, Avishai Mandelbaum, Anat Sakov, Haipeng Shen, Sergey Zeltyn, and Linda Zhao. Statistical analysis of a telephone call center: A queueing-science perspective. Journal of the American statistical association , 100(469):36–50, 2005. [69] R Dean Malmgren, Daniel B Stouffer, Adilson E Motter, and Luís AN Amaral. A poissonian explanation for heavy tails in e-mail communi-cation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105(47):18153– 18158, 2008. [70] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 , 2019. [71] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining ,pages 3505–3506, 2020. [72] Lianmin Zheng, Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhifeng Chen, Yanping Huang, Yida Wang, Yuanzhong Xu, Danyang Zhuo, Eric P Xing, et al. Alpa: Automating inter-and {Intra-Operator } par-allelism for distributed deep learning. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) , pages 559–578, 2022. [73] Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, Olatunji Ruwase, Shaden Smith, Min-jia Zhang, Jeff Rasley, et al. Deepspeed-inference: enabling efficient inference of transformer models at unprecedented scale. In SC22: In-ternational Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–15. IEEE, 2022. [74] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Loongserve: Efficiently serving long-context large lan-guage models with elastic sequence parallelism. In ACM SOSP , 2024. [75] Bingyang Wu, Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Shengyu Liu, Fangyue Liu, Yuanhang Sun, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Fast dis-tributed inference serving for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05920 , 2023. [76] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system for 

{Transformer-Based } generative models. In USENIX OSDI , 2022. [77] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-jee. Taming {Throughput-Latency } tradeoff in {LLM } inference with 

{Sarathi-Serve }. In USENIX OSDI , 2024. [78] Wonbeom Lee, Jungi Lee, Junghwan Seo, and Jaewoong Sim. 

{InfiniGen }: Efficient generative inference of large language mod-els with dynamic {KV } cache management. In USENIX OSDI , 2024. [79] Chen Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shu Liu, Woosuk Kwon, Xiangxi Mo, Yufeng Wang, Xiaoxuan Liu, Kaichao You, Zhuohan Li, Mingsheng Long, et al. Jenga: Effective memory management for serving llm with heterogeneity. In ACM SOSP , 2025. [80] Hongyu Wang, Shuming Ma, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Huaijie Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Fan Yang, Ruiping Wang, Yi Wu, and Furu Wei. Bitnet: Scaling 1-bit transformers for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11453 , 2023. [81] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangxuan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for on-device llm compression and acceleration. Proceedings of machine learning and systems , 6:87–100, 2024. [82] Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:16344–16359, 2022. [83] Zihao Ye, Lequn Chen, Ruihang Lai, Wuwei Lin, Yineng Zhang, Stephanie Wang, Tianqi Chen, Baris Kasikci, Vinod Grover, Arvind Krishnamurthy, et al. Flashinfer: Efficient and customizable attention engine for llm inference serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01005 , 2025. [84] LangChain: Build context-aware reasoning ap- plications. https://gith ub.com/langchain-ai/langchain. (Accessed on 02/15/2026). [85] Langflow: Low-code AI builder for agentic and RAG applications. https://www.langflow.org/. (Accessed on 02/15/2026). [86] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Auto-gen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 3(4), 2023. [87] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, et al. Dspy: Compiling declarative 17 language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [88] Hongyi Jin, Ruihang Lai, Charlie F Ruan, Yingcheng Wang, Todd C Mowry, Xupeng Miao, Zhihao Jia, and Tianqi Chen. A System for Microserving of LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12488 , 2024. 18 Algorithm 1: Router Request Rebalancing Policy.  

> 1

For Each Rebalance Tick:  

> 2

foreach instance 𝑖 do  

> 3

𝐿 𝑖 ← 𝛼 · Load (𝑖 ) + ( 1 − 𝛼 )𝐿 𝑖 ⊲ Update instance load using EWMA  

> 4

𝑠𝑟𝑐 ← arg max 𝑖 𝐿 𝑖  

> 5

𝑑𝑠𝑡 ← arg min 𝑖 ≠𝑠𝑟𝑐 𝐿 𝑖  

> 6

𝑔𝑎𝑝 ← 𝐿 𝑠𝑟𝑐 − 𝐿 𝑑𝑠𝑡  

> 7

𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 ← 𝐿 𝑠𝑟𝑐 /max (𝐿 𝑑𝑠𝑡 , 1) 

> 8

if 𝑔𝑎𝑝 < 𝜃 𝑎𝑏𝑠 or 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 < 𝜃 𝑟𝑒𝑙 then  

> 9

return ∅ ⊲ No rebalance  

> 10

𝑅 ← EligibleRequests (𝑠𝑟𝑐 ) ⊲ Filter out running or migrating requests  

> 11

if 𝑅 = ∅ then  

> 12

return ∅ 

> 13

foreach req 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 do  

> 14

𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑟 ← 𝑒 − ( 𝑛𝑜𝑤 −𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡 _𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑟 )/ 𝐻  

> 15

𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 𝑟 ← 1/( 1 + 𝜆 · 𝑚𝑖𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑟 ) 

> 16

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑟 ← 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑟 · 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑟 · 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 𝑟  

> 17

𝑟 ∗ ← arg max 𝑟 ∈𝑅 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑟  

> 18

return (𝑟 ∗, 𝑠𝑟𝑐, 𝑑𝑠𝑡 ) ⊲ Migrate one session 

## A Router Rebalancing Policy 

As shown in Alg. 1, the programmable router in §6.4 runs a simple rebalancing policy periodically. At each tick, it first updates an exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) load estimate for each instance using the current queue depth, including both waiting and running requests. It then selects the most-loaded instance as the source and the least-loaded instance as the target. A rebalance is triggered only when both the absolute load gap and the relative load ratio exceed predefined thresholds, 𝜃 𝑎𝑏𝑠 and 𝜃 𝑟𝑒𝑙 , thereby avoiding unnec-essary migrations when the cluster is already balanced. When rebalancing is needed, the policy considers only eligible requests on the source instance, excluding requests that are currently running or already under migration. Each eligible request is scored using three factors: request length in tokens, which estimates the potential KV reuse benefit; recency, which favors recently active requests; and a history penalty, which discourages repeatedly migrating the same request and avoids ping-pong behavior. The request with the highest score is selected as the migration candidate from the source to the target.