Title: 2606.07998v2.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07998v2

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:39:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
Enhancing AI Interpretability and Safety through Localised 

# Architectures 

Ian Seet 1, Jonas Bozenhard 2, Simon Osterman n3,4,5 

> 1

University of Glasgow 

> 2

Hamburg University of Technology 

> 3

Saarland University 4German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 5Centre for 

European Research in Trusted AI (CERTAIN) 

Abstract 

Recent advances in generative AI, especially powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) and 

Large Reasoning Models (LRMs), raise concerns over the interpretability, safety and 

sustainability of these large and opaque AI models. The power of such architectures i s derived 

not only from the scalability of deep neural networks, but also massively parallel hardware 

such as GPU clusters. The diffuse nature of deep neural networks gives them great function -

approximation capability when provided with sufficient trainin g data but imposes a cost in 

interpretability and computational efficiency. Observing that localised machine learning (ML) 

models tend to be more interpretable and computationally efficient than deep neural networks 

on small datasets, we reason by analogy that similar advantages may apply to specific localised 

hardware ML architectures. We argue that localised architectures with lower bandwidth but 

higher expressivity per node have the potential to be fundamentally more interpretable than 

deep neural networ ks running on GPU clusters while remaining competitive for smaller datasets. We then evaluate the suitability of various hardware ML paradigms for implementing 

such localised architectures and evaluate their per -node expressivity, energy efficiency and 

practical maturity of the technology required. 

Introduction 

Over the past three decades, artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms have evolved from 

algorithmically efficient and interpretable but highly domain -specific algorithms based on 

expert knowledge, to highly parallelisable algorithms based on various machine learning 

models which often yield far superior performance, albeit at the cost of computational 

efficiency and interpretability 1.

These advances have been made possible by massively parallel hardware architectures, ranging 

from repurposed existing commercially available hardware such as Graphical Processing Units 

(GPUs) 2,3 to bespoke designs such as Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) and Field -

Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) 4,5 . These architectures have allowed the training and 

execution of highly scalable and performant but algorithmically inefficient and poorly -

interpretable machine learning algorithms ranging from convolutional neural networks used in 

image processing 6 and zero -knowledge reinforcement learning 7 to transformer architectures 

capable of protein folding prediction 8, image generation and natural language processi ng 9.Although powerful, the primary disadvantages of such AI systems – poor interpretability and 

algorithmic inefficiency - arguably raise serious risk. In the short -term, these limitations 

increase the difficulty of mitigating known hazards such as the generat ion of biased outputs 

and factually incorrect but plausible -sounding hallucinations. These risks, in turn, adversely 

affect the trustworthiness of such models 10 . Moreover, the opacity of these algorithms increases 

the difficulty of aligning AI to human val ues, as it becomes challenging to determine precisely 

which values a model has learned. In the longer term, powerful but opaque Artificial General 

Intelligences (AGIs) may, on some accounts, pose an existential threat to humanity due to the 

potentially poo r controllability of opaque models. This underscores that the opacity of AI 

systems built on deep neural networks poses critical risks today and in the future 11 –14 .

Improving the transparency and interpretability of AI systems is a key step toward making A I

more controllable, safer, and better aligned with ethical values. 

In addition, the algorithmic inefficiency of these models increases the computational resources 

required to train and operate them, which in turn increases energy consumption and CO2 output 

with consequent impacts on climate change. In particular, Large L anguage Models (LRMs) 

and Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) consume enormous amounts of electricity and generate 

correspondingly large amounts of waste heat that demands cooling 10 .The poor interpretability of deep neural network architectures is a direct consequence of their 

highly interconnected and distributed nature, which often results in a substantial proportion of 

features participating in high -order interactions that are comp utationally difficult to disentangle 

into weakly -interacting components. The same high degree of interconnectivity also increases 

the computational cost of training deep neural networks, since the gradient must be calculated 

for each modifiable parameter and propagated backwards in gradient descent -based 

optimization techniques and every connection between neurons in a deep neural network has 

an associated weight parameter. 

Interpretability in machine learning and artificial intelligence 

Interpretability in machine learning (ML) has been defined 15,16 as “the degree to which a human 

can understand the cause of a decision”. This framing is useful for policy and compliance 

contexts, where the primary concern is whether a human observer finds an explanation 

satisfying. However, such post hoc explanations that satisfy a human observer do not guarantee 

that the explanation accurately reflects the model's internal mechanisms, and a model that 

produces plausible -sounding explanations for wrong reas ons is not thereby made safer or more 

controllable. A different and more demanding conception of interpretability is therefore 

required for AI safety: mechanistic interpretability .Mechanistic interpretability, as defined by Bereska et al. 11 , involves "reverse engineering the 

computational mechanisms and representations learned by an ML model into human -

understandable algorithms and concepts to provide a granular, causal understanding." For a 

model to be mechanistically interpretable it is no t sufficient to explain its outputs after the fact; 

the causal pathway from input to output must be understood and quantified at the level of the 

model's internal components. This goal has been g iven formal grounding in recent theoretical 

work: Geiger et al. 17 define a mechanistic interpretation as a high -level causal model that is a 

faithful abstraction of a low -level model, where faithfulness is tested by performing 

interchange interventions and verifying that the high -level model correctly predicts the effec ts 

of those interventions on the low -level system. This framework makes mechanistic 

interpretability empirically falsifiable rather than merely descriptive. 

In the philosophy of science, mechanistic interpretability has been compared to approaches 

used in the life sciences to investigate biological organisms 18 . These approaches involve 

decomposition , where phenomena are broken down into constitutive sub -functions (sometimes 

recursively to yield multi -level functional characterisations), and localisation , which maps 

each sub -function to a specific part of the system thought to implement it 19 . Accordingly, the 

more extensively an AI system supports localisation, the greater its mechanistic interpretability. 

It is also useful here to note that mechanistic interpretability is model -specific while post hoc 

interpretability tends to be more model -agnostic: mechanistic interpretability techniques, being 

dependent on model architecture, are not generalisable between different model types. Therefore, imposing design constraints (such as localisation) on model architecture is 

important if maximising mechanistic interpretability without compromising performance is 

desired. 

A central obstacle to localisation in modern deep neural networks is the phenomenon of 

superposition 20 . Under training pressure, neural networks are incentivised to represent more 

features than they have dedicated neurons, causing individual neurons to participate in the 

encoding of multiple unrelated concepts simultaneously. This polysemanticity means that no 

single neuron can be assigned a clean functional role, and any attempt to localise a concept to 

a specific part of the network will typically fail: the concept is distributed across overlapping 

subsets of neurons in a way that is difficult t o disentangle. Superposition is not an accidental 

property of particular architectures but an expected consequence of training highly connected 

networks with many more representational demands than available parameters. Any approach 

to interpretability tha t does not address superposition at the architectural level will face this as 

a persistent obstacle. 

Interpretability in neural networks vs. GAMs and tree -based models 

Although deep neural networks are generally the best -performing ML models for large datasets 

where inductive biases are weak or unknown, other models are more suitable for smaller 

datasets or where inductive biases allow some of the underlying structure of the problem to be 

exploited by the model. These alternative models are also often much more interpretable; two such classes of non -neural network models in particular serve as useful analogies when 

considering interpretability from a hardware perspective. 

The first class of models we shall consider are Generalised Additive Models (GAMs) 21 . These 

models represent the output as a linear combination of smooth univariate functions f of each of 

the n features in the embedding. 

𝑦 = 𝛽 0 + 𝑓 1(𝑥 1) + 𝑓 2(𝑥 2) + ⋯ + 𝑓 𝑛 (𝑥 𝑛 )

Since linear combinations are by definition additive, feature contributions in a basic GAM are 

very easy to isolate, giving GAMs a good reputation for both mechanistic and post hoc 

interpretability. However, most real -world multivariable functions cannot be represented as a 

simple linear combination of univariate functions of each feature, and for better performance 

GAMs must include higher -order interaction terms g.

𝑦 = 𝛽 0 + 𝑓 1(𝑥 1) + 𝑓 2(𝑥 2) + ⋯ + 𝑓 𝑝 (𝑥 𝑝 ) + 𝑔 1(𝑥 1, 𝑥 2) + 𝑔 2(𝑥 1, 𝑥 3) + ⋯

These higher -order interaction terms become increasingly difficult to calculate as the number 

of these terms scales exponentially with the number of features. Thus, the interpretability of 

GAMs comes at the cost of performance for datasets dominated by hig h-order interactions. 

Nevertheless, GAMs remain competitive with neural networks on tabular data (data where each 

feature is a well -defined variable) 22 particularly for small datasets. 

The second class of models we shall consider are decision trees. The basic decision tree model 

models the output via a tree where each node other than the leaves represents a decision made based on only one feature; a rule is applied based on either a threshold (for continuous features) 

or a categorization (for discrete features) 23 . The leaves of the tree represent the final outcomes. 

Basic decision trees are highly mechanistically interpretable since one can trace every decision 

made from root to leaf with clear thresholds or categories; however, they are prone to 

overfitting and b ecome increasingly large and cumbersome for problems with a high feature 

dimension. 

The two main approaches to mitigating these weaknesses are gradient boosting 24 (e.g. 

XGBoost) and aggregation (e.g. Random Forest) 25 . In the former, new trees intended to correct 

the errors of previous generations of trees are trained sequentially and the final prediction is 

the sum of the output of all the trees. In the latter, multiple trees are each trained on a subset of 

data and t he final prediction is aggregated either by averaging (for continuous variables) or 

majority vote (for discrete variables). These approaches reduce interpretability but greatly 

improve the performance of the model. Indeed, for tabular data gradient -boosted decision trees 

generally outperform deep neural networks 26,27 .

Although not considered as interpretable as standard decision trees, the fact that augmented 

decision trees do not differ significantly in their underlying mechanisms from standard decision 

trees illustrates how mechanistic interpretability contributes to post hoc interpretability. SHAP 

(Shapley Additive exPlanations) 28 is a post hoc interpretability technique commonly used to attribute each feature’s contribution to the model’s prediction. Via the algorithm TreeSHAP, 

SHAP values can be efficiently calculated exactly not only for both basic decision trees, but 

even augmented decision tree models like XGBoost or Random Forest 29 . This is because node 

splitting in augmented decision trees are still simple threshold functions based on a single 

feature, and this absence of high -order entanglement between features allows TreeSHAP to 

still efficiently attribute each feature contributi on . In contrast, exact SHAP values cannot be 

efficiently calculated for deep neural networks and must be approximated 30 .

Even though augmented decision trees are both more interpretable and perform better than deep 

neural networks for tabular data, node splitting has limited expressiveness in both basic and 

augmented decision trees (a split at a node is always a discrete fun ction over a single feature 

rather than a higher -order function over multiple features). This limitation prevents decision 

trees from outperforming neural networks in problems with very large datasets and poorly 

defined features (e.g. image recognition and natural language processing). 

The Best of Both Worlds? 

A reasonable question to ask at this point is whether using a neural network to perform the 

node splitting in a decision tree leads to a model with both the interpretability of decision trees 

and the performance of neural networks on large non -tabular data sets. This idea has already 

been tested; certain neural tree models outperform gradient -boosted decision trees for tabular data, albeit at the cost of interpretability 31 . GAMs can also be augmented with neural networks; 

Neural Additive Models (NAMs) replace each function f in a GAM with a neural network 

operating on a single feature, giving greater expressivity than GAMs while retaining 

interpretability because the feature contributions remain additively separable 32 . However, they 

retain the inability of GAMs to model higher -order cross -feature interactions. 

At this point, it is worth thinking about how one might achieve maximum performance for a 

given interpretability requirement if computational resources were unlimited. One could 

imagine a modified decision tree where a large selection of discrete and conti nuous functions 

of varying complexity and order could be used during the node splitting instead of a simple 

threshold based on a single feature. In order to maintain interpretability and prevent overfitting, 

a cost is imposed on every non -linear interactio n term proportional to its order during training 

so that such terms are only used when the increase in predictive power offsets the 

interpretability cost. Such a model would be much more expressive than a standard decision 

tree while remaining within a spe cified degree of interpretability due to the cost imposed on 

higher -order terms. However, it would also be extremely inefficient to train due to the 

exponential increase in search space for each function in the node -splitting library. It is 

therefore unlik ely that such a model would be able to compete with deep neural networks for 

most practical problems, at least under the constraints of current hardware. How hardware influences ML models 

In the early era of computing, increases in processing power were largely achieved by 

increasing the clock speed of the processors. The power consumption of an electronic logic 

gate increases with at least the cube of clock speed 33 and therefore simply overclocking a CPU 

to increase processing speed will result in large amounts of waste heat generated, which will 

eventually damage the device. Miniaturising circuit components reduces the capacitance and 

thus the energy required per c lock cycle; however, quan tum effects greatly increase noise as 

transistors shrink 34 . This fundamental physical limit forced hardware architects to increase the 

parallelisation within their chip designs instead to continue making gains in processing 

power 35 , a trend exemplified by the massively parallel GPU and GPU -like chip architectures 

(e.g. TPUs and FPGAs) currently in widespread use. 

This shift toward massively parallel chip architectures has also influenced the adoption of 

machine learning models that scale efficiently under parallel execution 36 . Access to massively 

parallel computing allows models to be trained directly on very high -dimensional 

representations, reducing the need for sophisticated feature engineering and causing in part the 

loss of interpretability which plagues deep learning. In the absence of massively parallel chip 

architectures, decision trees would likely see far more widespread use as they do not benefit 

from GPU parallelisation to the same extent that deep neural networks do 37 .

Locality, interpretability and distributed computing 

Throughout this paper, we have tried to emphasize the overarching theme that interpretable 

ML models tend to be localised – that is, they do their best to avoid entangling many features 

together in high -order interactions unless doing so substantially impr oves the predictive power 

of the model. It is important here to observe a critical nuance: localised algorithms can still benefit greatly from parallelisation; for instance, a parallel processor could calculate each term 

in a GAM separately before the final summation which is the only step not trivially 

parallelisable. 

The key difference, however, is that GPU clusters are not merely parallel but distributed; large 

quantities of information can be transmitted between GPUs and memory because electronic 

information transmission has both a high bandwidth and low latency comp ared to signal 

transmission through the axon of a biological neuron 38,39 , for instance. The fact that information 

transmission in GPUs has a high bandwidth and low latency is critical for backpropagation in 

deep neural networks because dense connectivity b etween layers requires large volumes of 

gradient information to be exchanged and synchronised efficiently during training. 

If the available hardware were not capable of this high -bandwidth -low -latency information 

exchange, it would become necessary to design more localised (and thus more interpretable) 

ML models. To compensate for this reduction, the architecture would need to be more 

expressive at each individual node. A precedent for this type of hardware architecture 

functioning in practice exists in the form of biological neural networks, which as previously 

stated have far lower bandwidth and higher latency than electronic logic. 

It would be difficult to describe the operation of biological neural networks as interpretable in 

the same sense applied to artificial ML models. However, this difficulty arises less from an 

inherent opacity of localised, low -bandwidth neural architectures than from a mismatch 

between the functions expressible by biological neurons (e.g. in dendritic computations 40 ) and 

the analytic and discrete functions that form the basis of human mathematical description. Indeed, the localised nature of biological neural networks allows the portions of the human 

brain to be targeted directly to alter a person’s behaviour for medical purposes, e.g. with deep 

brain stimulation 41 .

It is also useful here to note a difference between interpretability and controllability . A model 

does not have to be interpretable in either the mechanistic or post hoc sense for an external 

control to modify its output in a predictable manner, and it should be intuitively obvious that 

this is easier to accomplish for localised models than models where representations are highly 

distributed like artificial deep neural ne tworks – hence, for instance, the practice of using 

Reinforcement Learning with Human F eedback (RLHF) to alter the behaviour of LLM 

transformers over trying to identify and modify specific parts of the model responsible for 

undesirable behaviour 42 . Controllability, in this sense, refers to the ability to induce reliable 

and targeted changes in model behaviour through external intervention, without necessarily 

understanding the underlying computational mechanisms that produce that behaviour. It is a 

weaker but more practically attainable property than full mechanistic interpretability, and one 

that is increasingly important as AI systems grow more powerful and broadly deployed. 

A prominent example of controllability without full mechanistic interpretability is activation 

steering, wherein targeted additive interventions on intermediate model representations are 

used to shift model behaviour at inference time, without any paramete r updates 43 –45 . Such 

methods are grounded in the Linear Representation Hypothesis (LRH), which posits that 

concepts tend to be encoded as approximately linear directions in a model's activation space 46 .

Crucially, reliable controllability does not require the LRH to hold universally: Recent work 

has shown that when linearity assumptions are relaxed, some representational alignment claims 

become vacuous 47 . It is sufficient that approximate linear structure is stable enough to support predictable intervention in practice; even if the underlying geometry is non -linear, a linear 

approximation over local regions of activation space yields consistent behavioural effects 

across a diverse range of models and tasks 48,49 . Where such structure is absent or unstable, 

steering may fail, which is a limitation that itself carries diagnostic value for understanding 

model internals. While full mechanistic interpretability would be ideal, controllability in its 

absence can still improve safety by allowi ng for targeted modifications to curb undesirable 

behaviour. 

Implementing localised ML hardware architectures 

In general, a localised ML hardware architecture should have two characteristics if it is to be 

competitive against distributed architectures while maintaining interpretability. Firstly, the 

high latency and low bandwidth must be compensated for to render these architectures 

competitive against their distributed counterparts. This can be done by increasing the 

expressivity of each local node, although there must be a cost imposed on higher -order 

interactions to maintain interpretability per the example of t he modified decision tree. 

Secondly, high energy efficiency is also desired. It would be naive to expect the AI industry to 

switch to localised architectures for interpretability alone while sacrificing some performance 

as such a switch would likely not be profitable. If, however, t he localised architectures were 

more energy efficient, it would be possible to encourage private businesses to make the switch 

through financial incentives, for instance via the imposition of taxes on energy -hungry data 

centres. The seemingly obvious choice to implement such an architecture are analogue electronics 50 ,

which have already been used to both run and train neural networks. As one major selling point 

of analogue electronic architecture is its enhanced energy efficiency compared to digital 

architectures when running neural networks, it would seem to be a log ical choice given the 

criteria outlined above. However, several major problems would limit the effective 

implementation of localised architectures with analogue electr onics. 

Firstly, analogue logic is generally susceptible to errors induced by thermal noise, and while 

analogue electronics are often far more efficient than digital electronics when running neural 

networks, they are often less efficient during training because th e higher precision required 

when calculating gradients force costly analogue -digital conversions and error correction 

steps 51,52 . Perhaps the larger issue, however, is that electronic analogue logic is simply not as 

expressive per unit bandwidth when compa red to other architectures (for instance, 

electrochemical systems like biological neural networks 53 ); thus, there is little reason for 

electronic analogue ML models to differ significantly in localisation from models designed to 

run on GPUs. In addition, the noise sensitivity of analogue systems complicate the 

identification of precise states or transit ions underlying particular system behaviours and 

outcomes, thereby negatively affecting interpretability in practice / real -life applications 54 .

If electronic analogue logic is insufficiently expressive, we could instead consider 

electrochemical neuromorphic architectures, which are inspired by biological neural networks 

and exploit charge separation and ion concentration gradients to encode, proce ss and transmit 

information 55 . While there is a clear precedent for the broad concept working in practice (the 

human brain), we would likely encounter similar problems with interpretability that also occur 

when analysing the behaviour of biological neural networks. It could be argued that unlike biological neurons, an artificial electrochemical neuromorphic architecture could be designed 

from the ground up to use only activation functions considered interpretable while still being 

more expressive than artificial neural networks. However, modelling electrochemistry and ion 

dynamics at the nanoscale (the same scale biological voltage -gated ion channels operate at) 

with the accuracy needed to implement interpretable well -defined nonlinear activation 

functions would be highly computationally demanding 56,57 . Conversely, it is less likely that 

electrochemical devices operating on larger scales (where their behaviour would be easier to 

model with bulk diffusion processes) would be fast or efficient enough to compete against 

neural networks running on tradition al distributed electronic computing architectures. 

If electrochemical systems are too difficult to model at the scales necessary to be competitive 

with traditional electronic computing, we could in turn consider purely chemical architectures. 

Chemical reaction networks have been used for this purpose 58 . However, many of the same 

arguments applied to electrochemical systems apply to diffusion -based chemical architectures; 

the reduction in scale required to compete against traditional electronics would also make the 

task of modelling the architecture to t he a ccuracy required computationally difficult. In 

addition, long -range transmission of information in a pure chemical diffusion system would be 

even slower than an electrochemical system, which is already orders of magnitude slower than 

traditional electronic s. There is irrefutable physical evidence in the form of the human brain 

that information transmission at the speeds possible in an electrochemical system still allow 

low -bandwidth electrochemical ML architectures capable of outperforming electronic ML 

arc hitectures across many domains to be designed, but no corresponding evidence that the even 

slower transmission speed in pure chemical diffusion systems would allow for similarly viable 

chemical architectures. If our objective was purely to create an analogue hardware architecture which could implement 

a selected function to the highest accuracy possible, macroscale mechanical logic (e.g. the 

Babbage engine) would be the most reasonable choice given that these s ystems can be 

modelled to a very high accuracy with only pure Newtonian mechanics 59 . Macroscale 

mechanical logic is unfortunately both slow and inefficient by the standards of electronic logic 

and would not be a viable competitor against the latter. 

To render mechanical logic viable, it would likely be necessary to miniaturise the devices to 

the point where thermal noise becomes significant 60 . These molecular mechanical devices 

execute logical operations and transmit information via conformational changes of highly rigid 

molecules and are of sufficiently low mass such that the average kinetic energy of the system, 

while in operation, is not si gnificantly greater than the kinetic energy of the system when in 

thermodynamic equilibrium. By avoiding bond f ormation and diffusion, molecular mechanical 

systems are both highly energy efficient and can be accurately simulated with purely 

Newtonian molecular dynamics 60,61 , far less computationally intensive than the fluid dynamics 

needed for accurate modelling of electrochemical and chemical diffusion -based systems. 

However, since these systems are subject to the effects of thermal noise, analogue -to -digital 

conversion for error correction and information transmission would also be as necessary as it 

is for analogue electronic logic. Even so, thermal noise is not nece ssarily a pure detriment; 

thermal noise in a molecular system could also potentially be exploited to improve training by 

using an annealing -based algorithm 62 to find good approximate solutions to the difficult 

combinatorial problem of minimising the number of few high -order interactions while 

maximising predictive power. Molecular mechanical systems should also possess a high degree 

of expressiveness due to having many more degrees of freedom compared to an electronic analogue circuit, though it is likely there will be functions the latter can approximate more 

efficiently. These advantages in efficiency and expressiveness are offset by the fact that such 

systems are currently not practical to synthesise via either botto m-up chemical synthetic 

techniques or top -down lithography techniques. 

Conclusion 

In this paper, we discuss the concept of interpretability and the value of mechanistic 

interpretability in particular for improving AI safety. By contrasting the fundamental structure 

of two classes of interpretable ML models with deep neural networks, we argue that localisation 

tends to make a model more interpretable, and the physical characteristics (high bandwidth and 

low latency) of distributed electronic hardware architectures specifically encourage the 

development of uninterpretable ML models. 

Each hardware paradigm we have proposed to potentially implement localised architecture has 

distinct advantages and disadvantages. Electronic analogue logic is the most mature but lacks 

expressiveness. Electrochemical and chemical diffusion -based architect ure most closely 

resembles biological neural networks but are slower and fundamentally difficult to simulate to 

high accuracy. Molecular mechanical logic is easy to simulate to high accuracy, highly 

expressive and potentially very energy efficient, but the furthest from practical synthesis. 

Despite the potential difficulties in implementing these localised interpretable architectures, 

we believe that the threats posed from uninterpretable AI justifies continued research in this 

domain. 

Acknowledgements This research received no external funding. The authors are grateful to Kevin Baum for 

reviewing the manuscript and providing feedback. 

Bibliography 

(1) Haenlein, M.; Kaplan, A. A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: On the Past, 

Present, and Future of Artificial Intelligence. Calif. Manage. Rev. 2019 , 61 (4), 5 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125619864925. 

(2) Raina, R.; Madhavan, A.; Ng, A. Y. Large -Scale Deep Unsupervised Learning Using 

Graphics Processors. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference 

on machine learning ; 2009; pp 873 –880. 

(3) Cireşan, D. C.; Meier, U.; Gambardella, L. M.; Schmidhuber, J. Deep, Big, Simple 

Neural Nets for Handwritten Digit Recognition. Neural Comput. 2010 , 22 (12), 

3207 –3220. 

(4) Jouppi, N. P.; Young, C.; Patil, N.; Patterson, D.; Agrawal, G.; Bajwa, R.; Bates, S.; 

Bhatia, S.; Boden, N.; Borchers, A.; others. In -Datacenter Performance Analysis of 

a Tensor Processing Unit. In Proceedings of the 44th annual international 

symposium on computer architecture ; 2017; pp 1 –12. 

(5) Chen, Y.; Xie, Y.; Song, L.; Chen, F.; Tang, T. A Survey of Accelerator Architectures 

for Deep Neural Networks. Engineering 2020 , 6 (3), 264 –274. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2020.01.007. 

(6) Anwar, S. M.; Majid, M.; Qayyum, A.; Awais, M.; Alnowami, M.; Khan, M. K. Medical 

Image Analysis Using Convolutional Neural Networks: A Review. J. Med. Syst. 

2018 , 42 , 1 –13. 

(7) Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Lai, M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; 

Sifre, L.; Kumaran, D.; Graepel, T.; others. A General Reinforcement Learning 

Algorithm That Masters Chess, Shogi, and Go through Self -Play. Science 2018 , 362 

(6419), 1140 –1144. 

(8) Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; 

Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.; Potapenko, A.; others. Highly Accurate 

Protein Structure Prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 2021 , 596 (7873), 583 –589. 

(9) Devlin, J.; Chang, M. -W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre -Training of Deep 

Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. ArXiv Prepr. 

ArXiv181004805 2018 .

(10) Manzini, A.; Keeling, G.; Marchal, N.; McKee, K. R.; Rieser, V.; Gabriel, I. Should 

Users Trust Advanced AI Assistants? Justified Trust as a Function of Competence 

and Alignment; 2024; pp 1174 –1186. 

(11) Bereska, L.; Gavves, E. Mechanistic Interpretability for AI Safety --a Review. ArXiv 

Prepr. ArXiv240414082 2024 .

(12) Ngo, R.; Chan, L.; Mindermann, S. The Alignment Problem from a Deep Learning 

Perspective, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00626. 

(13) Weidinger, L.; Mellor, J.; Rauh, M.; Griffin, C.; Uesato, J.; Huang, P. -S.; Cheng, M.; 

Glaese, M.; Balle, B.; Kasirzadeh, A. Ethical and Social Risks of Harm from 

Language Models. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv211204359 2021 .(14) Gunning, D.; Stefik, M.; Choi, J.; Miller, T.; Stumpf, S.; Yang, G. -Z. XAI —Explainable 

Artificial Intelligence. Sci. Robot. 2019 , 4 (37), eaay7120. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aay7120. 

(15) Miller, T. Explanation in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Social Sciences. 

Artif. Intell. 2019 , 267 , 1 –38. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007. 

(16) Biran, O.; Cotton, C. V. Explanation and Justification in Machine Learning : A 

Survey Or; 2017. 

(17) Geiger, A.; Ibeling, D.; Zur, A.; Chaudhary, M.; Chauhan, S.; Huang, J.; Arora, A.; 

Wu, Z.; Goodman, N.; Potts, C. Causal Abstraction: A Theoretical Foundation for 

Mechanistic Interpretability. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2025 , 26 (83), 1 –64. 

(18) Kästner, L.; Crook, B. Explaining AI through Mechanistic Interpretability. Eur. J. 

Philos. Sci. 2024 , 14 (4), 52. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13194 -024 -00614 -4. 

(19) Bechtel, W.; Richardson, R. C. Discovering Complexity: Decomposition and 

Localization as Strategies in Scientific Research ; MIT press, 2010. 

(20) Elhage, N.; Hume, T.; Olsson, C.; Schiefer, N.; Henighan, T.; Kravec, S.; Hatfield -

Dodds, Z.; Lasenby, R.; Drain, D.; Chen, C. Toy Models of Superposition. ArXiv 

Prepr. ArXiv220910652 2022 .

(21) Wood, S. N. Generalized Additive Models. Annual Review of Statistics and Its 

Application , 2025, 12 , 497 –526. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -

statistics -112723 -034249. 

(22) Doohan, J.; Kook, L.; Burke, K. Comparison of Generalised Additive Models and 

Neural Networks in Applications: A Systematic Review. Expert Syst. Appl. 2026 ,

131082. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.131082. 

(23) Blockeel, H.; Devos, L.; Frénay, B.; Nanfack, G.; Nijssen, S. Decision Trees: From 

Efficient Prediction to Responsible AI. Front. Artif. Intell. 2023 , Volume 6 -2023 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2023.1124553. 

(24) Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings 

of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 

Data Mining ; KDD ’16; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 

2016; pp 785 –794. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785. 

(25) Altman, N.; Krzywinski, M. Ensemble Methods: Bagging and Random Forests. Nat. 

Methods 2017 , 14 (10), 933 –934. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4438. 

(26) Liu, A. J.; Mukherjee, A.; Hu, L.; Chen, J.; Nair, V. N. Performance and 

Interpretability Comparisons of Supervised Machine Learning Algorithms: An 

Empirical Study. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv220412868 2022 .

(27) Borisov, V.; Leemann, T.; Seßler, K.; Haug, J.; Pawelczyk, M.; Kasneci, G. Deep 

Neural Networks and Tabular Data: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 

2022 , 35 (6), 7499 –7519. 

(28) Lundberg, S. M.; Lee, S. -I. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information 

Processing Systems ; NIPS’17; Curran Associates Inc.: Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017; 

pp 4768 –4777. 

(29) Yang, J. Fast Treeshap: Accelerating Shap Value Computation for Trees. ArXiv 

Prepr. ArXiv210909847 2021 .

(30) Fernando, Z. T.; Singh, J.; Anand, A. A Study on the Interpretability of Neural 

Retrieval Models Using DeepSHAP. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ;

SIGIR’19; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp 

1005 –1008. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331312. 

(31) Li, H.; Song, J.; Xue, M.; Zhang, H.; Song, M. A Survey of Neural Trees: Co -Evolving 

Neural Networks and Decision Trees. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2025 ,

36 (7), 11718 –11737. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3446891. 

(32) Agarwal, R.; Melnick, L.; Frosst, N.; Zhang, X.; Lengerich, B.; Caruana, R.; Hinton, 

G. E. Neural Additive Models: Interpretable Machine Learning with Neural Nets. 

Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2021 , 34 , 4699 –4711. 

(33) Beloglazov, A.; Buyya, R.; Lee, Y. C.; Zomaya, A. Chapter 3 - A Taxonomy and 

Survey of Energy -Efficient Data Centers and Cloud Computing Systems; Zelkowitz, 

M. V., Ed.; Advances in Computers; Elsevier, 2011; Vol. 82, pp 47 –111. 

https://doi.org/https://doi .org/10.1016/B978 -0-12 -385512 -1.00003 -7. 

(34) Equbal, M. S.; Sahay, S. Scaling the MOSFET: Detrimental Short Channel Effects 

and Mitigation Techniques. In Nanoelectronics: Physics, Materials and Devices ;

Elsevier, 2023; pp 11 –37. 

(35) Millett, L. I.; Fuller, S. H. The Future of Computing Performance: Game over or next 

Level? ; National Academies Press, 2011. 

(36) Mittal, S.; Vaishay, S. A Survey of Techniques for Optimizing Deep Learning on 

GPUs. J. Syst. Archit. 2019 , 99 , 101635. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.101635. 

(37) Wen, Z.; He, B.; Kotagiri, R.; Lu, S.; Shi, J. Efficient Gradient Boosted Decision Tree 

Training on GPUs. In 2018 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing 

Symposium (IPDPS) ; IEEE, 2018; pp 234 –243. 

(38) Testa -Silva, G.; Verhoog, M. B.; Linaro, D.; de Kock, C. P. J.; Baayen, J. C.; Meredith, 

R. M.; De Zeeuw, C. I.; Giugliano, M.; Mansvelder, H. D. High Bandwidth Synaptic 

Communication and Frequency Tracking in Human Neocortex. PLoS Biol. 2014 , 12 

(11), e1002007. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002007. 

(39) NVIDIA DGX -1 With Tesla V 100 System Architecture The Fastest Platform for Deep 

Learning; 2018. 

(40) Acharya, J.; Basu, A.; Legenstein, R.; Limbacher, T.; Poirazi, P.; Wu, X. Dendritic 

Computing: Branching Deeper into Machine Learning. Neuroscience 2022 , 489 ,

275 –289. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.10.001. 

(41) Perlmutter, J. S.; Mink, J. W. Deep Brain Stimulation. Annu Rev Neurosci 2006 , 29 ,

229 –257. 

(42) Chaudhari, S.; Aggarwal, P.; Murahari, V.; Rajpurohit, T.; Kalyan, A.; Narasimhan, 

K.; Deshpande, A.; Castro da Silva, B. RLHF Deciphered: A Critical Analysis of 

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback for LLMs. ACM Comput Surv 2025 ,

58 (2). https://doi.org/10.1145/3743127. 

(43) Turner, A. M.; Thiergart, L.; Leech, G.; Udell, D.; Mini, U.; MacDiarmid, M. Activation 

Addition: Steering Language Models without Optimization. 2024 .

(44) Ostermann, S.; Gurgurov, D.; Baeumel, T.; Hedderich, M. A.; Lapuschkin, S.; 

Samek, W.; Schmitt, V. From Weights to Activations: Is Steering the Next Frontier 

of Adaptation? ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv260414090 2026 .

(45) Zou, A.; Phan, L.; Chen, S.; Campbell, J.; Guo, P.; Ren, R.; Pan, A.; Yin, X.; Mazeika, 

M.; Dombrowski, A. -K. Representation Engineering: A Top -down Approach to Ai 

Transparency. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv231001405 2023 .(46) Park, K.; Choe, Y. J.; Veitch, V. The Linear Representation Hypothesis and the 

Geometry of Large Language Models. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv231103658 2023 .

(47) Sutter, D.; Minder, J.; Hofmann, T.; Pimentel, T. The Non -Linear Representation 

Dilemma: Is Causal Abstraction Enough for Mechanistic Interpretability? Adv. 

Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2026 , 38 , 149455 –149503. 

(48) Arditi, A.; Obeso, O.; Syed, A.; Paleka, D.; Panickssery, N.; Gurnee, W.; Nanda, N. 

Refusal in Language Models Is Mediated by a Single Direction. Adv. Neural Inf. 

Process. Syst. 2024 , 37 , 136037 –136083. 

(49) Rimsky, N.; Gabrieli, N.; Schulz, J.; Tong, M.; Hubinger, E.; Turner, A. Steering 

Llama 2 via Contrastive Activation Addition; 2024; pp 15504 –15522. 

(50) Belostotski, L.; Uddin, A.; Madanayake, A.; Mandal, S. A Survey of Analog 

Computing for Domain -Specific Accelerators. Electronics 2025 , 14 (16), 3159. 

(51) Fahimi, Z.; Mahmoodi, M. R.; Klachko, M.; Nili, H.; Kim, H.; Strukov, D. B. Mitigating 

Imperfections in Mixed -Signal Neuromorphic Circuits. ArXiv Prepr. 

ArXiv210704236 2021 .

(52) Rasch, M. J.; Carta, F.; Fagbohungbe, O.; Gokmen, T. Fast and Robust Analog In -

Memory Deep Neural Network Training. Nat. Commun. 2024 , 15 (1), 7133. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -024 -51221 -z. 

(53) Beniaguev, D.; Segev, I.; London, M. Single Cortical Neurons as Deep Artificial 

Neural Networks. Neuron 2021 , 109 (17), 2727 -2739.e3. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.07.002. 

(54) Kiener, M.; Bozenhard, J.; Kutyniok, G.; Nyholm, S. The Ethics of Analog AI. AI 

Ethics 2026 , 6 (1), 27. 

(55) Chen, S.; Zhang, T.; Tappertzhofen, S.; Yang, Y.; Valov, I. Electrochemical -

Memristor -Based Artificial Neurons and Synapses -Fundamentals, Applications, 

and Challenges. Adv. Mater. Deerfield Beach Fla 2023 , 35 (37), e2301924. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202301924. 

(56) Flood, E.; Boiteux, C.; Lev, B.; Vorobyov, I.; Allen, T. W. Atomistic Simulations of 

Membrane Ion Channel Conduction, Gating, and Modulation. Chem. Rev. 2019 ,

119 (13), 7737 –7832. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00630. 

(57) Modi, N.; Winterhalter, M.; Kleinekathöfer, U. Computational Modeling of Ion 

Transport through Nanopores. Nanoscale 2012 , 4 (20), 6166 –6180. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C2NR31024D. 

(58) Baltussen, M. G.; de Jong, T. J.; Duez, Q.; Robinson, W. E.; Huck, W. T. S. Chemical 

Reservoir Computation in a Self -Organizing Reaction Network. Nature 2024 , 631 

(8021), 549 –555. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -024 -07567 -x. 

(59) Yasuda, H.; Buskohl, P. R.; Gillman, A.; Murphey, T. D.; Stepney, S.; Vaia, R. A.; 

Raney, J. R. Mechanical Computing. Nature 2021 , 598 (7879), 39 –48. 

(60) Seet, I.; Ouldridge, T. E.; Doye, J. P. K. Simulation of Reversible Molecular 

Mechanical Logic Gates and Circuits. Phys Rev E 2023 , 107 (2), 024134. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.107.024134. 

(61) Seet, I.; Ouldridge, T. E.; Doye, J. P. Pipelined Information Flow in Molecular 

Mechanical Circuits Leads to Increased Error and Irreversibility. Phys. Rev. E 2024 ,

110 (4), 045310. 

(62) Lee, B. W.; Sheu, B. J. Hardware Annealing in Analog VLSI Neurocomputing ;

Springer Science & Business Media, 2012; Vol. 127.