Title: Adaptive Heterogeneous Compression for Resource-Efficient Federated Knowledge Distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15660v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:23:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Adaptive Heterogeneous Compression for Resource-Efficient Federated Knowledge Distillation 

Chenwang Liu, Yijun Liu, Chang Liu, Xu Zhang, and Pengchao Han 

Abstract —Federated learning (FL) enables privacy-preserving distributed model training but faces challenges from heteroge-neous model architectures and limited communication resources at the network edge. Federated knowledge distillation (FedKD) alleviates model heterogeneity by combining prototype-wise pa-rameter aggregation and knowledge transfer across heteroge-neous models. However, transmitting gradients still introduces considerable communication overhead, while existing compres-sion approaches typically apply a uniform strategy across clients and ignore their diverse model characteristics and resource capacities. To address this issue, we propose a heterogeneous compression framework for FedKD that enables each client to select a compression strategy from a candidate strategy set. We formulate the compression strategy selection problem as a non-stationary stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB), where each arm corresponds to a compression strategy. An efficiency-aware reward is designed by jointly considering local optimization improvement, global knowledge alignment, and execution time. Based on this formulation, we develop an Adaptive heterogeneouS Compression algorithm for fEderated kNowledge Distillation (ASCEND), which employs an exponential moving average (EMA)-enhanced ϵ-greedy policy to balance exploration and ex-ploitation. Experimental results on multiple datasets demonstrate that ASCEND effectively adapts to heterogeneous model and resource settings, reducing communication overhead and training time while maintaining competitive model accuracy. 

Index Terms —Federated Knowledge Distillation, Heteroge-neous, Gradient Compression, Multi-Armed Bandit 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# FEDERATED learning (FL) has emerged as a promis-ing distributed learning paradigm for privacy-preserving model training, enabling multiple clients to collaboratively learn a shared model [1]. However, FL inherently suffers from the heterogeneity of client devices and network conditions. In practice, participating clients, such as mobile devices and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, often exhibit diverse com-putational resources, memory availability, and communication bandwidths. These disparities make it necessary for clients to adopt heterogeneous model architectures tailored to their local system capabilities, which limits the applicability of traditional parameter-averaging-based FL algorithms that require identical model architectures [2]. 

Chenwang Liu, Yijun Liu, Chang Liu, and Pengchao Han (cor-responding author) are with the School of Information Engineer-ing, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (email: liuchenwang@mails.gdut.edu.cn, 3124002274@mails.gdut.edu.cn, li-uchang@gdut.edu.cn, hanpengchao@gdut.edu.cn). Xu Zhang is with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China (email: zhangxu@cqupt.edu.cn). 

Federated knowledge distillation (FedKD) has emerged as a promising approach to address model architecture hetero-geneity in FL. In typical FedKD frameworks [3], a prototype denotes a specific model architecture adopted by a group of clients. The server performs hybrid aggregation that incorpo-rates parameter averaging for clients within the same prototype and logit-based knowledge distillation (KD) across different prototypes. However, repeatedly exchanging full gradients introduces significant communication overhead, especially for large-scale models and resource-constrained edge devices. Gradient compression provides an effective solution to alle-viate communication overhead in FedKD by transmitting only a subset of gradient entries. Representative methods include Top-K, Random-K, and Periodic-K [4]–[7]. However, most existing works adopt a uniform compression strategy across clients and training rounds, neglecting system heterogeneity. First, clients with different computational capabilities require different optimal strategies. For instance, computationally in-tensive strategies such as Top-K may benefit powerful devices but overload resource-constrained ones, while lightweight methods such as Random-K may degrade performance. Sec-ond, model heterogeneity further affects strategy selection, as Top-K incurs higher sorting cost for large models, whereas it may outperform Random-K for small models due to better update quality. These limitations raise a key question: 

Key Question : How can compression strategies be selected for clients with diverse model architectures and resource capacities to achieve an effective balance between training efficiency and learning performance? To answer this question, we propose a heterogeneous com-pression framework for FedKD, where each client adaptively selects a compression strategy from a candidate strategy set according to its model characteristics and resource capacities. Furthermore, we formulate the heterogeneous compression strategy selection as an optimization problem that aims to max-imize efficiency-aware performance improvement. However, solving this problem is challenging. First, the performance gain of each compression strategy is revealed after execution, making the corresponding reward unavailable in advance. Sec-ond, the optimal compression strategy may change throughout training, where performance-oriented strategies may be pre-ferred in early stages while efficiency-oriented strategies may become more desirable in later stages. To overcome these challenges, we propose an Adaptive heterogeneouS Compression algorithm for fEderated kNowl-edge Distillation (ASCEND). Specifically, we formulate the client-specific compression strategy selection problem as a non-stationary stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, arXiv:2608.15660v1 [cs.DC] 16 Aug 2026 2

where each arm corresponds to a candidate compression strat-egy. A reward function is designed to jointly capture model improvement and execution efficiency by considering local training loss, global knowledge alignment, and time cost. An exponential moving average (EMA)-enhanced ϵ-greedy policy is adopted to balance exploration and exploitation during adaptive strategy selection. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

Heterogeneous Compression Framework for FedKD .We propose a heterogeneous compression framework for FedKD that enables each client to independently select a customized compression strategy from a candidate compression set under heterogeneous model architectures and resource conditions. We provide a convergence anal-ysis under non-convex loss functions, yielding O(1 /√T )

convergence rates.  

> •

Compression Strategy Optimization Problem . We for-mulate a heterogeneous compression strategy optimiza-tion problem that maximizes cumulative efficiency-aware performance, explicitly capturing the tradeoff among compression cost, communication cost, and learning per-formance.  

> •

ASCEND Algorithm with Theoretical Guarantee . We model compression strategy selection as a non-stationary stochastic MAB problem and propose ASCEND for adap-tive strategy selection under dynamic training conditions. Under a piecewise-stationary approximation, we derive a sublinear regret bound of O(1 /√M T ), providing a theoretical guarantee for the long-term performance of ASCEND.  

> •

Experimental Validation . Extensive experiments on both a real-world platform and simulation settings demonstrate that ASCEND adapts effectively to diverse model and resource settings, significantly reducing com-munication overhead and training time while maintaining high accuracy. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II reviews related work. Section III presents the system model and preliminaries, including FL, FedKD, and gradient compression with residual accumulation. Section IV intro-duces the proposed heterogeneous compression framework and provides a convergence analysis. Section V proposes the ASCEND algorithm and its analysis. Section VI presents the experimental evaluation of the ASCEND algorithm. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. II. R ELATED WORK 

In this section, we review the literature on FedKD and communication-efficient FL via gradient compression. 

A. Federated Knowledge Distillation 

FedKD is an effective approach to address model hetero-geneity in FL by exchanging knowledge representations, such as soft predictions and intermediate features [3], [8]–[10]. A recent survey [9] revisits KD in collaborative machine learning, highlighting the importance of effective knowledge exchange under heterogeneous learning tasks. Existing FedKD methods mainly differ in their knowledge sharing mechanisms. FedMD [11] utilizes a shared public dataset to align prediction outputs among heterogeneous client models, while FedGen [12] introduces a generative model to synthesize proxy samples when public datasets are unavailable. Beyond prediction-level knowledge transfer, representation-based FedKD methods exploit intermediate feature informa-tion. For example, FedProto [13] introduces class-level feature representations extracted from local models and exchanges these semantic representations among clients. FedTGP [14] constructs and optimizes global class-level feature representa-tions on the server side. Instead of directly aggregating local representations, FedTGP learns more discriminative global se-mantic representations to improve representation aggregation. Some studies further consider the personalization issue caused by diverse client characteristics. For example, KTpFL [15] in-corporates KD into personalized FL by transferring knowledge from the global model to client-specific models. Although these methods effectively mitigate model hetero-geneity, the limited amount of shared knowledge may restrict global performance. To improve knowledge aggregation capa-bility, FedDF [16] introduces a hybrid aggregation framework that combines parameter averaging among homogeneous mod-els with KD across heterogeneous models. However, FedDF requires clients to upload gradients for ensemble aggregation, incurring substantial communication overhead in bandwidth-constrained federated environments. 

B. Communication-Efficient FL via Gradient Compression 

Communication overhead is one of the major challenges in FL, especially when clients need to frequently exchange high-dimensional gradients in bandwidth-constrained networks. Gradient compression has been widely studied to reduce communication cost by transmitting compact representations of gradients while preserving learning performance [7]. Top-K compression is one of the most representative ap-proaches, where only gradients with the largest magnitudes are uploaded. DGC [7] further incorporates momentum cor-rection, local gradient clipping, and residual accumulation to compensate for information loss caused by aggressive com-pression. These techniques improve communication efficiency while maintaining convergence performance. To reduce the computational overhead of coordinate selection, Random-K

compression randomly selects gradient entries for transmis-sion [5]. Although it avoids the sorting operation required by Top-K, it may introduce additional variance during opti-mization. Periodic-K compression [6] addresses this issue by periodically selecting different coordinates, ensuring that all gradients are updated within a predefined number of iterations. Adaptive compression methods dynamically adjust com-pression configurations according to training dynamics or system conditions to achieve a better trade-off between com-munication efficiency and model performance. AdaComp [17] introduces adaptive residual gradient compression, where the compression rate is dynamically adjusted according to gradient residual activity to balance compression efficiency and model accuracy. For a fixed compression method, Han et al. [18] pro-3

pose an online learning method that adaptively adjusts the Top-

K compression ratio according to gradient statistics during training, reducing communication overhead while preserving convergence performance. Although existing compression approaches significantly re-duce communication overhead, most methods optimize a sin-gle compression mechanism, ignoring heterogeneous model architectures, data characteristics, and system resources. They do not consider adaptive selection among multiple heteroge-neous compression strategies. In FedKD scenarios, different compression strategies may provide different performance-efficiency trade-offs for different clients. Therefore, adaptive selection among multiple compression strategies remains an open problem, motivating our heterogeneous compression framework and online strategy selection approach. III. S YSTEM MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES 

In this section, we first present a brief overview of FL and FedKD. We then introduce gradient compression strategies with residual accumulation, which serve as the building blocks of our heterogeneous compression framework. 

A. Federated Learning 

An FL system consists of a central server and a client set 

N with total N = |N | clients. Each client n ∈ N possesses a local dataset Dn of size |D n|. Each client trains a local model parameterized by ω to minimize an empirical risk function over its private dataset, defined as 

fn(ω) = 1

|D n|

> |D n|

X

> i=1

ℓn(ω; xni ), (1) where ℓn(ω; xni ) denotes the sample-wise loss incurred by the model parameters ω on the ith local training sample xni ∈ D n.In FL, all clients aim to collaboratively learn a global model parameterized by ω by solving the following weighted optimization problem [19]: 

min  

> ω

f (ω) = 

> N

X

> n=1

|D n|

PNn=1 |D n| fn(ω). (2) Classical FL algorithms such as FedAvg [20] perform server-side aggregation by averaging local model updates from participating clients. However, such approaches typically require identical model architectures across clients, limiting their applicability in scenarios with model architecture hetero-geneity. 

B. Federated Knowledge Distillation 

FedKD is effective in addressing model architecture hetero-geneity in FL by enabling knowledge transfer among clients with diverse model architectures [3], [8], [11], [16]. To enable knowledge transfer among heterogeneous models, KD is per-formed using a small unlabeled public dataset Dpub . We define a prototype as a specific model architecture. Different clients in FedKD may share the same prototype. Let Np denote the set of clients adopting prototype p. Classical FedKD methods aggregate local client models through a hybrid strategy that combines parameter averaging among clients with the same model architecture and logit averaging across heterogeneous models [16]. In FedKD, each training round t proceeds as follows. At the start of each training round, each prototype p with parameter ωpt is broadcast to the corresponding clients to process distributed model training as follows.  

> •

Local training : Each client n performs local optimization on its private dataset and computes a stochastic local gradient: 

gnt = ∇fn(ωnt ; ςnt ), (3) where ωnt denotes the local model parameters of client 

n at communication round t, and ςnt represents the mini-batch sampled from the local dataset of client n.Instead of uploading the updated local model, each client transmits the computed gradient gnt to the server. Upon receiving the local gradients, the server updates the cor-responding local models by gradient descent and obtain the updated model ˜ωnt . 

> •

Parameter averaging : After obtaining the updated local models { ˜ωnt }Nn=1 , the server performs parameter averag-ing for each model prototype p:

¯ωpt = X

> n∈N p

1

|N p| ˜ωnt , ∀p, (4) where ¯ωpt represents the aggregated prototype model at round t. 

> •

Global knowledge construction (logit averaging) : The server evaluates each model on the public dataset Dpub 

to obtain its logits: 

zn(x) = ϕn( ˜ ωnt ; x), ∀x ∈ Dpub , (5) where ϕn(ω; x) denotes the logit output of client model 

n with parameters ω for input sample x. The global logits are computed by averaging the logits of all clients: 

¯z(x) = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

zn(x). (6) The corresponding global soft targets are obtained by applying the softmax function: 

˜y(x) = softmax  ¯z(x). (7)  

> •

Global KD : To enable each prototype to learn the global knowledge, for each prototype p, the server distills the global knowledge ˜y(x) into the aggregated prototype model ¯ωpt by minimizing the KL divergence: 

Lp

> KD

( ¯ ωpt ) = 1

|Dpub |

X

> x∈Dpub

LKL 

 softmax  ψp( ¯ ωpt ; x), ˜y(x),

(8) where ψp(ω; x) denotes the logit output of prototype model p with parameters ω for input sample x.After distillation, the prototype parameters are updated to 

ωpt+1 and transmitted back to the corresponding clients: 

ωnt+1 ← ωpt+1 , ∀n ∈ N p. (9) 4

Each client uses the received model to start the subse-quent training round. 

C. Gradient Compression with Residual Accumulation 

In FedKD, clients are required to transmit their local model gradients to the server, which incurs substantial communica-tion overhead, particularly for large-scale models. To alleviate this burden, various gradient compression strategies with resid-ual accumulation have been proposed to reduce communica-tion costs while preserving convergence guarantees [7], [21], [22]. In this section, we first review representative gradient compression techniques, including Top-K, Random-K, and Periodic-K. Then, we introduce the server-side aggregation of the compressed gradients, followed by the analysis to motivate our heterogeneous compression framework. 

1) Client-Side Compression with Residual Accumulation: 

To compensate for information loss introduced by gradient compression, each client maintains a residual vector ent−1 at the end of round t − 1, which accumulates the gradient entries that were not transmitted in previous rounds. At round t,the input to the compression operator C(·; ·) is an augmented update vector unt , defined as the sum of the current gradient and the residual: 

unt = ent−1 + gnt . (10) For a compression strategy snt ∈ {Top-K, Random-K, 

Periodic-K} , the compressed gradient on client n is 

ˆgnt = C(unt ; snt ) . (11) The resulting vector ˆgnt is associated with an index set 

Int ⊆ {1, . . . , d } of cardinality K, where d denotes the gradient dimension and |Int | = K. For convenience, we define a reconstruction operator B(·; ·) that maps the compressed representation back to the original gradient dimension. In 

B(ˆ gnt ; Int ) ∈ Rd, the entries indexed by Int are filled with the transmitted gradient values and the remaining entries are set to zero. Typical compression strategies are summarized as follows.  

> •

Top-K Compression : Each client selects the K entries of unt with the largest magnitudes [7], [22], [23]: 

Int = TopK( unt , K ). (12) Top-K compression preserves the most informative gra-dient directions but incurs a relatively high computational cost due to sorting, with computational complexity of 

O(d log K) [7], [22].  

> •

Random-K Compression : Each client randomly sam-ples K indices from all gradient dimensions [21], [24], [25]: 

Int = RandomK( unt , K ). (13) This strategy has low computational complexity, i.e., 

O(K), but it may introduce high gradient variance and low model performance [21], [23], [24].  

> •

Periodic-K Compression : Each client maintains a bi-nary indicator vector bnt ∈ { 0, 1}d indicating whether a Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 100120140160180200 Time (s) 0.32 0.40 0.48 0.56 Accuracy                

> (a) K= 10 5176 184 192 200 208 Time (s) 0.52 0.53 0.54 0.55 Accuracy (b) K= 5 ×10 5170180190200210220 Time (s) 0.51 0.53 0.54 0.55 Accuracy (c) K= 2 ×10 6
> Fig. 1: Model performance of three compression strategies under different K
> (dataset: CIFAR-10, α= 0 .5).

coordinate has been selected within the current period that contains Tp iterations [23]. The selected index set is 

Int = PeriodicK( bnt , K ), (14) where unvisited coordinates are prioritized to ensure periodic coverage of all coordinates, followed by random completion if necessary. After transmission, the selected coordinates are marked as visited, and the time-flag vector 

bnt is updated accordingly. Once all coordinates have been selected at least once, the flag vector is reset to initiate a new periodic cycle. Periodic-K compression avoids costly sorting and en-sures periodic updates of all gradient coordinates, achiev-ing a favorable balance between computation efficiency and convergence stability. Its computational cost is dom-inated by index selection, with a time complexity of 

O(K).After compression, the client transmits the compressed gradients ˆgnt together with its corresponding index set Int to the server. To ensure convergence of the federated training process, the residual vector ent is updated by preserving the untransmitted gradient entries: 

ent = unt − B (ˆ gnt , Int ). (15) This residual accumulation effectively compensates for infor-mation loss due to compression and is crucial for achieving stable convergence. 

2) Server-Side Processing of Compressed Gradients: Upon receiving the compressed representation (ˆ gnt , Int ) from par-ticipating clients, the server reconstructs the d-dimensional compressed gradient vector using the reconstruction operator: 

˜gnt = B(ˆ gnt , Int ). (16) The reconstructed gradients are used to update the corre-sponding models for global aggregation and KD: 

˜ωnt = ωnt − ηt ˜gnt , (17) where ηt denotes the learning rate in round t

3) Motivation for Heterogeneous Compression: The three gradient compression strategies, namely Top-K, Random-K,and Periodic-K, exhibit different trade-offs between compres-sion overhead and model performance. To investigate whether a uniform compression strategy is suitable for heterogeneous 50.450.600.750.901.05 Time (s) 0.70 0.80 0.90 Accuracy 

(a) LeNet5Half 0.500.751.001.251.50 Time (s) 0.90 0.92 0.94 0.96 Accuracy (b) LeNet5 Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 

Fig. 2: Model performance of three compression strategies under different model prototypes (dataset: MNIST, α = 0 .5, K = 1 × 10 3). 

FedKD, we evaluate these strategies under different compres-sion levels and model prototypes on CIFAR-10 and MNIST. As shown in Fig. 1, the preferable compression strategy varies with the compression level. Specifically, Top-K tends to achieve better accuracy under aggressive compression, while Random-K becomes more competitive when a larger communication budget is available due to its lower selection overhead. Furthermore, Fig. 2 demonstrates that the optimal strategy also depends on model architectures under the same compression setting, where Top-K is desirable for a smaller model, e.g., LeNet5Half, and Random-K is better for a larger model, e.g., LeNet5. These results indicate that no single compression strategy can consistently achieve the best trade-off across heteroge-neous clients. Therefore, enforcing a uniform compression strategy may lead to suboptimal performance in FedKD, mo-tivating the proposed heterogeneous compression framework. IV. F ED KD WITH HETEROGENEOUS COMPRESSION 

This section introduces a heterogeneous compression frame-work that allows clients to adopt different compression strate-gies based on their model architectures and computational resources. We then provide a convergence analysis for the proposed framework and discuss the motivation for adaptive strategy selection. 

A. Heterogeneous Compression Framework 

For each client, we define the candidate compression set S

as a collection of three representative strategies: 

S = {Top -K, Random -K, Periodic -K}. (18) Each element in S corresponds to a distinct compression strategy, characterized by different trade-offs among model accuracy, computational overhead, and communication effi-ciency. Figure 3 illustrates the system architecture of the proposed FedKD framework with heterogeneous gradient compression. As shown, each client independently performs local training on its private dataset, constructs residual-accumulated gradients, and applies a compression strategy from S before transmitting compressed gradients and corresponding indices to the server. The server first reconstructs the compressed gradients and updates the corresponding client models. Then, the updated client models are utilized for prototype-wise parameter aggre-gation among clients with the same model architecture and Client 1               

> Residual
> accumulation
> Local training Private dataset
> Gradient reconstruction
> and model updates
> Prototype -wise parameter
> averaging
> Global logit averaging
> Knowledge distillation
> Server
> Compressed gradients Different prototypes
> Compression strategy
> Selection
> Top-K Random-K Periodic-K
> 1. 2. 3. 4.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 213Indices of selected gradients
> 213Upload Compressed gradient + indices
> Download Updated prototype models
> Public dataset
> Client 2 Client N
> Data 2 Data 2
> Data n Data n
> Data 1 Data 1
> 213
> Input Output
> Upload
> 213
> 5.
> Local model training and compression on each client

Fig. 3: The system architecture of the heterogeneous compression framework for FedKD. 

global logit averaging across all client models. Finally, the server performs KD on the public dataset Dpub to align global knowledge and broadcasts the updated prototype models back to the corresponding clients [3], [8]. 

B. Convergence Analysis of FedKD with Heterogeneous Com-pression 

This section analyzes the convergence behavior of the proposed heterogeneous compression framework in FedKD. Unlike conventional FL methods with homogeneous models, FedKD maintains multiple model prototypes to handle model architecture heterogeneity. Therefore, we conduct the conver-gence analysis from the perspective of each model prototype. The following assumptions are introduced to analyze the convergence of the proposed heterogeneous compression framework. 

Assumption 1 (Smoothness for Local Training Objective) .

For each client n, the objective function fn(ω) is Ll-smooth [6], [26]. Specifically, there exists a constant Ll > 0

such that 

∥∇ fn(ω) − ∇ fn(ω′)∥ ≤ Ll ∥ω − ω′∥ , ∀ω, ω′. (19) 

Assumption 2 (Smoothness for KD Objective) . For each prototype p, the objective function Lp

> KD

(ω) is Lp-smooth [27]. Specifically, there exists a constant Lp > 0 such that 

∥∇L p

> KD

(ω) − ∇L p

> KD

(ω′)∥ ≤ Lp ∥ω − ω′∥ , ∀ω, ω′. (20) 

Assumption 3 (Unbiased Stochastic Gradient) . For each client 

n ∈ N p and round t, the stochastic gradient gnt satisfies [6] 

E [gnt | ωpt ] = ∇fn(ωpt ). (21) 6

Assumption 4 (Bounded Stochastic Gradient Variance) . For any client n and round t, the variance of stochastic gradients is bounded by a constant σ2 > 0 [6], [28], i.e., 

E

h

∥gnt − ∇ fn(ωpt )∥2i

≤ σ2. (22) 

Assumption 5 (Bounded Error-Feedback Residual) . For each client n and round t, the accumulated residual satisfies [29], [30] 

E ∥ent ∥2 ≤ Γmax , (23) 

where Γmax denotes the maximum residual amplification fac-tor among all candidate compression strategies. 

Assumption 5 ensures that these untransmitted errors remain stable and do not diverge after accumulating across multiple rounds of residual propagation. For theoretical analysis, we define the joint optimization objective of prototype p as 

Fp(ωpt ) = fp(ωpt ) + λLpKD (ωpt ), (24) where λ balances the local optimization objective and the global knowledge alignment objective. Thus, we have the following theorem for the convergence of FedKD with het-erogeneous compression for non-convex loss functions. 

Theorem 1 (Convergence of FedKD with Heterogeneous Compression) . Under Assumptions 1– 5, for each prototype 

p, after T communication rounds, the proposed FedKD frame-work with heterogeneous compression satisfies 

1

T 

> T−1

X

> t=0

E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 ≤ 4( Fp(ωp

> 0

) − F ∗ 

> p

+ Ck)3ηtT + 4L

3 ηtCg ,

(25) 

By setting ηt = O(1 /√T ), the convergence rate becomes 

1

T 

> T−1

X

> t=0

E

h

∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2i

= O

 1

√T



. (26) The proof of the theorem can be found in our online report [*]. Theorem 1 shows that the proposed method converges with a convergence rate of O(1 /√T ), which equals the convergence rate of existing FL methods. 

C. Motivation for Adaptive Compression Algorithm 

Although the heterogeneous compression framework en-ables clients to adopt different compression strategies ac-cording to their characteristics, determining the appropriate strategy for each client remains challenging. Specifically, the performance of each compression strategy cannot be known before execution and may vary during training due to dynamic model states and system conditions. Therefore, an online strategy selection mechanism is re-quired to allow each client to adaptively identify suitable compression strategies based on observed training feedback. This motivates the formulation of compression strategy selec-tion as a non-stationary stochastic MAB problem, where each compression strategy corresponds to an arm and the observed efficiency-aware performance gain serves as the reward. V. F ED KD WITH ADAPTIVE HETEROGENEOUS 

COMPRESSION 

In this section, we first formulate the heterogeneous com-pression strategy optimization problem in FedKD. Then, we formulate the problem as a MAB and propose the adaptive heterogeneous compression algorithm. Finally, we analyze the regret of the online algorithm. 

A. Heterogeneous Compression Strategy Optimization Prob-lem 

The heterogeneous compression strategy optimization prob-lem aims to maximize efficiency-aware model performance by determining the compression strategy snt ∈ S for all clients 

n ∈ N at round t. To achieve this, we define the model per-formance gain of client n at round t as G(snt ). In FedKD, the time overhead covers the local training time, the computation time for gradient compression, and the communication time for gradient transmission. Thus, the problem is defined as 

Problem 1 (Heterogeneous Compression Strategy Optimiza-tion Problem) . In FedKD with heterogeneous compression, all clients aim to 

max  

> {snt}n∈N
> N

X

> n=1
> T

X

> t=1

G(snt ). (27) Solving Problem 1 is challenging. First, the performance gain G(snt ) is stochastic and unknown in advance, which is only revealed after the compression strategy snt is selected and executed by client n. Moreover, the reward distribution may vary over time due to non-stationary factors such as data heterogeneity, changes in loss values, and dynamic commu-nication conditions. This observation motivates us to address Problem 1 in an online decision-making framework. Specifi-cally, we formulate adaptive compression strategy selection as a non-stationary stochastic MAB problem, where each client selects a compression strategy from a finite candidate set at each communication round and observes the corresponding reward as feedback. The objective is to learn an effective strategy-selection policy that maximizes the cumulative ex-pected performance gain over time. 

B. MAB Formulation 

We first formulate the time overhead and reward. Then, we reformulate Problem 1 as an MAB. In this reformulation, each client n decides a sequence of compression strategies {snt }

over training rounds. 

1) Time overhead: We formulate the client-side training time for each training round t as 

τ nt (snt ) = νn(snt , K ) + ζn(ωnt ) + ϑn(K), (28) where νn(·, ·) denotes the compression time that depends on the selected strategy, model architecture, and compression level K, ζn(·) represents the local training time of client n,and ϑ(·) represents the transmission time of the compressed gradients and their indices. 7

2) Reward: The reward of client n is defined as an efficiency-aware performance gain: 

G(snt ) = ∆Ln(t)

τ nt (snt ) , (29) where ∆Ln(t) quantifies the model improvement induced by the selected compression strategy. Specifically, for each client 

n with prototype p at round t, ∆Ln(t) is measured by jointly considering global knowledge alignment that reflects global knowledge improvement and local optimization progress that captures the client-specific loss reduction on private data: 

∆Ln(t) = ρ



Lp

> KD

( ¯ ωpt−1) − L p

> KD

( ¯ ωpt )



+ β



fn(ωnt−1) − fn(ωnt )



,

(30) where ρ, β > 0 denote the weighting coefficients. The global KD loss for prototype p, i.e., Lp

> KD

( ¯ ωpt ) and the local loss of client n, i.e., fn(ωnt ) are defined in (8) and (1), respectively. The KD loss component is computed at the server and then is fed back to the corresponding clients. By normalizing the combined performance gain with the execution time τ nt , the proposed reward encourages com-pression strategies that achieve faster convergence with lower computational and communication overhead. Furthermore, we apply a clipping function to the reward to avoid numerical instability caused by large reward fluctuations: 

G(snt ) ← clip( G(snt ), Gmin , Gmax ) . (31) In our experiments, the thresholds are set to Gmin = −1 and 

Gmax = 1 .

3) MAB Formulation: The reward of each compression strategy is time-varying because it evolves with dynamic model performance during training. Therefore, we model the proposed strategy selection as a non-stationary stochastic MAB. Unlike adversarial settings where rewards may change arbitrarily, the reward transition in our framework follows the intrinsic optimization dynamics. We define the MAB problem as follows. 

Problem 2 (Non-stationary Stochastic MAB formulation) . We reformulate Problem 1 as a non-stationary stochastic MAB problem.  

> •

Arms: each arm corresponds to a compression strategy 

snt ∈ S ; 

> •

Policy: In each training round t, client n selects acompression strategy snt to balance exploration and ex-ploitation: 

snt =

(Random (S), with probability ϵt,

arg max  

> s∈S

Qnt (s), with probability 1 − ϵt. (32) 

where ϵt ∈ (0 , 1) denotes the exploration rate and Qnt (s)

denotes the local utility estimate of strategy s maintained by client n at round t. 

> •

Utility update: Each client maintains a local utility estimate Qnt (s′) for each strategy s′ ∈ S . To adapt to non-stationary stochastic reward variation, we employ an EMA-based utility estimator within an ϵ-greedy policy [31]. After observing the reward G(snt ), client n updates its utility estimate as follows: 

Qnt+1 (s′) = 

(  1 − ηq

Qnt (s′) + ηq G (snt ) if snt = s′,Qnt (s′) if snt̸ = s′.

(33) 

where ηq ∈ (0 , 1] denotes the EMA step size. C. Algorithm Design 

In this section, we propose the ASCEND algorithm for Problem 2, where each client independently optimizes its com-pression strategy in an online manner to cope with dynamic model performance and computational efficiency trade-offs in heterogeneous FedKD. Specifically, the proposed algorithm combines an adaptive exploration policy and a rollback-based stability safeguard. 

1) Adaptive Exploration Policy: We employ a two-phase exploration policy to adapt to different training stages:  

> •

Warm-up Phase: To avoid early-stage bias in utility estimation, each client performs a fixed number of warm-up trials for every compression strategy in S. Let S = |S| 

denote the number of available compression strategies. During the warm-up stage, each strategy snt ∈ S is selected exactly h times by each client, resulting in a total of hS warm-up rounds. The selection order is randomly permuted to prevent systematic ordering bias. Each strategy snt is treated as an independent arm and is associated with a reward estimate G(snt ). The reward of strategy snt is estimated as the empirical mean: 

Qn 

> 0

(s′) = 1

h

> h|S|

X

> t=1

G(snt )Isnt =s′ . (34) Here, Isnt =s′ indicates whether the selected strategy snt

corresponds to the target strategy s′. The empirical mean operation provides an initial estimate of the average re-ward for each strategy for the subsequent adaptive EMA-enhanced ϵ-greedy updates. As a result, at the end of the warm-up stage, each client maintains S initialized utility values {Qn 

> 0

(s)}s∈S , one for each compression strategy.  

> •

Adaptive Phase: For rounds t > hS , the compression strategy is selected following (32). Here, Qnt (s) is ini-tialized by Qn 

> 0

(s) and updated according to (33). We define the exploration rate in (32) as 

ϵt = min 



1, c

√t



, (35) where c is a fixed hyperparameter. 

2) Rollback-Based Stability Safeguard: To prevent unstable convergence caused by overly aggressive or rapidly fluctuating compression strategy selections, we incorporate a rollback-based stability safeguard inspired by [32], [33]. A stability check is performed by comparing the global loss between two consecutive rounds. For any prototype p, if a sudden loss surge is detected, i.e., 

Lp

> KD

( ¯ ωpt ) > γ Lp

> KD

( ¯ ωpt−1), (36) 8

Algorithm 1: ASCEND algorithm                                                                                                                                                

> Input: Client set N, public dataset Dpub , warm-up length h,exploration rate ϵt, learning rate ηt,ηq.
> Output: Clients’ models {ωnT}n∈N .
> 1Initialize prototype models ωp
> 0,∀pand distribute them to corresponding clients;
> 2Initialize residual vectors en
> 0←0,∀n∈ N and utility estimates
> Qn
> 0(s)←0,∀n∈ N ,∀s∈ S ;
> 3for t= 1 to Tdo Client-side Local Training and Gradient Compression:
> 4for each client n∈ N in parallel do
> 5Compute local gradient gnt;
> 6Accumulate residuals: unt←ent−1+gnt;
> 7Select compression strategy sntby (37);
> 8Compress gradients: (ˆ gnt,Int)← C (unt;snt);
> 9Update residuals: ent←unt− B (ˆ gnt;Int);
> 10 Upload (ˆ gnt,Int)to the server;
> Server-side Prototype-wise Model Aggregation:
> 11 Reconstruct compressed gradients: ˜gnt← B (ˆ gnt,Int),∀n∈ N ;
> 12 for each prototype pdo
> 13 Update local models: ˜ωnt←ωnt−ηt˜gnt,∀n∈ N p;
> 14 Aggregate prototype model by (4);
> Server-side KD:
> 15 Evaluate all models on Dpub and compute averaged logits ¯z(x)
> by (6);
> 16 Update each prototype model by minimizing Lp
> KD ( ¯ ωpt);
> 17 Broadcast updated prototype models and global loss to clients;
> 18 if Lp
> KD ( ¯ ωpt)> γ Lp
> KD ( ¯ ωpt−1)then
> 19 Roll back to round t−1and enforce unified compression;
> Client-side Reward and Utility Update:
> 20 for each client n∈ N in parallel do
> 21 Compute reward G(snt)by (29);
> 22 Update utility estimate:
> Qnt+1 (snt) = (1 −ηq)Qnt(snt) + ηqGnt(snt).

where γ > 1 is a predefined stability threshold, the system activates the following stabilization procedure:  

> •

Model Rollback: All client models and prototype models are restored to their parameters from the previous round 

t − 1. 

> •

Strategy Unification: To provide a conservative fallback under unstable conditions, all clients adopt the Top-K

strategy for the next round. By reverting the system to a previously stable state and temporarily constraining strategy heterogeneity, this roll-back mechanism effectively mitigates performance degrada-tion caused by erratic compression decisions and enhances the robustness of the proposed adaptive compression framework. 

3) Algorithm Description: The ASCEND algorithm is sum-marized in Algorithm 1. In each round t, participating clients first perform local training (line 5). Each client then selects a compression strategy according to the EMA-enhanced ϵ-greedy policy: 

snt =



the next in shuffled sequence , t ≤ h|S| ,

Random (S), t > h |S| with probability ϵt,

arg max  

> s∈S

Qnt (s), t > h |S| with probability 1 − ϵt;

(37) (line 7), compresses its residual-accumulated gradients (line 8), and uploads the resulting compressed gradient repre-sentation to the server (line 10). To aggregate heterogeneous compressed gradients, the server first reconstructs the received compressed gradients (line 11) and updates the corresponding client models (line 13). The updated models within each prototype p are then aggregated through parameter averaging to obtain the prototype models (line 14). Afterwards, the server adopts a logit-based KD mechanism using a small public dataset Dpub .Specifically, the server evaluates all models on Dpub and averages their logits to construct global soft targets, which capture shared knowledge across different prototypes (line 15). Each prototype model further aligns its output distribution with the global soft targets via KL-divergence-based KD (line 16). The distilled prototype models and the global loss are subsequently broadcast to their corresponding clients for the next round of local training (line 17). In addition, clients compute the instantaneous reward (line 21) and update the utilities (line 22) to facilitate the subsequent strategy selection and global optimization. 

D. Algorithm Analysis 

In this section, we analyze the regret of the proposed ASCEND algorithm. We first define the regret used to evaluate ASCEND. Since the reward is affected by stochastic gradients, data sampling, and model evolution, it is treated as a random variable. For notational simplicity, we hereinafter use Gnt (s) to denote the reward obtained by client n when selecting compression strategy s in communication round t. The expected reward is defined as 

μnt (s) = E [Gnt (s)] . (38) Unlike in stationary bandit problems, μnt (s) may vary through-out training because the optimization states and KD outcomes continuously evolve. Accordingly, the optimal compression strategy for client n in round t is defined as 

sn, ∗ 

> t

= arg max  

> s∈S

μnt (s). (39) The regret of ASCEND for client n over T communication rounds is then defined as 

RnT =

> T

X

> t=1

μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt ) , (40) which measures the cumulative expected-reward loss relative to the round-wise optimal compression strategies. The following assumptions are introduced for analyzing the adaptive strategy selection behavior of ASCEND. 

Assumption 6 (Piecewise Stationary Reward) . The reward process of each compression strategy is assumed to be piece-wise stationary during the training process [34], [35]. Specif-ically, the entire communication process is divided into M

stationary segments: 

{T 1, T2, . . . , TM }, (41) 

where the reward distribution remains approximately un-changed within each segment. That is, for client n, compres-sion strategy s ∈ S , and communication round t ∈ T i, the expected reward satisfies 

μnt (s) = μni (s), ∀i, (42) 9

where μni (s) denotes the stationary expected reward of strategy 

s within segment Ti.

Assumption 7 (Reward Concentration) . The stochastic reward obtained from each compression strategy satisfies the sub-Gaussian concentration property [36]. Specifically, for any 

n ∈ N , s ∈ S , and x > 0,

Pr ( |G nt (s) − μnt (s)| > x ) ≤ 2 exp 



− x2

2σ2

> g



, ∀t > h |S| ,

(43) 

where σ2 

> g

represents the variance of the reward distribution. 

Assumption 8 (Sufficient Strategy Sampling) . For each client 

n, stationary segment Ti, and strategy s ∈ S , let ri denote the first communication round of segment Ti. We define 

Hni,t (s) = 

> t

X

> x=ri

I{snx = s}, ∀s ∈ S (44) 

as the number of times that strategy s has been selected from round ri to round t during the segment Ti. Then, there exists a constant πmin ∈ (0 , 1] such that 

Hni,t (s) ≥ πmin (t − ri + 1) , ∀s ∈ S . (45) Based on the above assumptions, we introduce the follow-ing lemmas to characterize the estimation errors and regret incurred by the EMA, exploration, and exploitation phases of ASCEND. We first characterize how the EMA tracks the expected reward within each stationary segment. 

Lemma 1 (EMA Error) . For any client n and compression strategy s ∈ S , within a stationary segment Ti, the EMA-based utility estimate satisfies 

|E[Qnt (s)] − μni (s)| ≤ (1 − ηq )m E[Qnri (s)] − μni (s) , (46) 

where m represents the number of updates of strategy s during this segment. 

Lemma 1 shows that, within a stationary segment, the expected EMA tracking error decreases geometrically with the number of updates m. Thus, strategies that are sampled more frequently can adapt more rapidly to the reward distribution of the current segment. We then derive separate regret bounds for the exploration and exploitation phases. 

Lemma 2 (Regret Upper Bound for Exploration ) . Under As-sumptions 6–7, the cumulative regret incurred by exploration over T communication rounds satisfies 

Rn

> explore

(T ) ≤ 2c∆max 

√T , (47) 

where 

∆max = Gmax − G min (48) 

is the maximum instantaneous regret under the clipped reward range, and c is the constant in the exploration rate defined in 

(35) . Consequently, 

Rn

> explore

(T ) = O(√T ). (49) Lemma 2 indicates that the cumulative cost of exploration grows sublinearly with the number of communication rounds. Hence, the average regret caused by exploration vanishes as 

T increases. 

Lemma 3 (Regret Upper Bound for Exploitation) . Under As-sumptions 6–8, the cumulative regret incurred by exploitation for client n satisfies 

Rn

> exploit

(T ) ≤ CeMX

> i=1

p|T i|, (50) 

where Ce is a constant determined by the EMA update coefficient, reward variation, initialization error, and reward concentration parameter. Consequently, 

Rn

> exploit

(T ) ≤ Ce

√M T . (51) Lemmas 2 and 3 jointly characterize the regret incurred by the two adaptive selection phases of ASCEND. Under a piecewise-stationary reward model, we derive an O(√T )

exploration-regret bound and an O(√M T ) exploitation-regret bound. Based on the preceding lemmas, we establish the overall regret bound of ASCEND. 

Theorem 2 (Regret Upper Bound of ASCEND) . For each client n, the cumulative regret of ASCEND over T communi-cation rounds satisfies 

Rn

> ASCEND

(T ) ≤ h|S| ∆max + 2 c∆max 

√T + Ce

√M T , (52) 

where the three terms correspond to the regret incurred during the warm-up, exploration, and exploitation phases, respectively. Since the warm-up length h|S| is fixed, the overall regret satisfies 

Rn

> ASCEND

(T ) = O(√M T ). (53) The proofs of Lemmas 1–3 and Theorem 2 are provided in [*]. Theorem 2 demonstrates that ASCEND asymptotically ap-proaches the performance of the round-wise optimal compres-sion strategy in a piecewise-stationary training environment. The regret bound further reveals the impact of environmental non-stationarity: a larger number of stationary segments M

leads to a higher tracking cost because ASCEND must re-peatedly adapt its utility estimates to changes in the reward distributions. Combined with Theorem 1, which establishes convergence under any compression strategy in S, Theorem 2 shows that ASCEND can adaptively select communication-efficient compression strategies without compromising the convergence guarantee of the underlying federated optimization process. VI. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed ASCEND algorithm via experiments. We introduce the experimental settings, present empirical results on a real-world platform and various experimental evaluations, and conduct sensitivity analysis to investigate the impact of critical hyperparameters. 10           

> TABLE I: Local Training Time per Round (seconds) Dataset Model Time (s) MNIST LeNet5Half 0.0025 MNIST LeNet5 0.0045 CIFAR-10 WResNet40-2 0.120 CIFAR-10 ResNet18 0.194

A. Setup 

We introduce the setup, including federated settings, datasets, models, time overheads, and baselines. 

1) Federated setting: We build a real-world platform with 10 Raspberry Pi devices, which act as resource-constrained edge clients controlled by a server. For experimental evalua-tion, we evaluate a total of 10 clients, each of which is assigned a local model architecture from the candidate prototype set. The batch size is set to 32, and the learning rate is 0.02. The weighting parameters ρ and β in (30) are set to 0.6 and 0.4, respectively, and the fixed hyperparameter c in (35) is set to 3 in all experiments. These default values are chosen to achieve favorable empirical performance, and we conduct sensitivity analysis to investigate the impact of hyperparameter variations. 

2) Datasets: We conduct experiments on two datasets, namely MNIST [37] and CIFAR-10 [38]. To simulate realistic non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) settings, datasets are partitioned using a Dirichlet distribution with parameter α that controls the degree of data heterogeneity. A smaller α leads to a more skewed class distribution, while a larger α yields a more balanced data distribution. Unless otherwise specified, we set α = 0 .5.

3) Models: For the MNIST dataset, we employ two lightweight convolutional neural networks, namely LeNet5 and LeNet5Half, where LeNet5Half is a shallower and more compact variant of LeNet5. The total number of trainable parameters is 61,706 for LeNet5 and 15,738 for LeNet5Half, respectively. For the CIFAR-10 dataset, we consider two architectures, ResNet18 and WResNet40-2. ResNet18 con-tains 11,183,562 parameters, while WResNet40-2 contains 2,248,954 parameters. Compared with ResNet18, WResNet40-2 adopts a wider residual architecture with increased width and a different depth-width trade-off, providing a useful com-plementary model pair for evaluating the proposed adaptive compression framework under heterogeneous model sizes and architectural characteristics. 

4) Time overheads: For the platform, we collect the real computation and communication time and feed them back to the ASCEND algorithm for compression strategy deter-mination. For the experimental evaluation, the computation time, including local training and gradient compression, is instantiated using the real measured execution time of the system on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU and an AMD Ryzen 7 4800H CPU. All computation times are obtained by averaging over multiple runs. The local training time is reported in Table I, while representative compression times for different values of K are summarized in Tables II and III. The communication time for client n is modeled as 

φn(K) = K · bv + K · bi

B × 10 6 , (54)                                                       

> TABLE II: Gradient Compression Time on MNIST (seconds)
> Model Method K= 5 ×10 210 35×10 3
> LeNet5Half Top-K1.70e-7 3.40e-7 1.70e-6 Random-K3.50e-8 7.00e-8 3.50e-7 Periodic-K1.00e-7 2.00e-7 1.00e-6 LeNet5 Top-K3.05e-7 6.10e-7 3.05e-6 Random-K6.00e-8 1.20e-7 6.00e-7 Periodic-K1.75e-7 3.50e-7 1.75e-6
> TABLE III: Gradient Compression Time on CIFAR-10 (seconds)
> Model Method K= 10 55×10 52×10 6
> WResNet40-2 Top-K1.3e-4 3.0e-4 9.0e-4 Random-K2.0e-5 3.0e-5 7.5e-5 Periodic-K6.5e-5 1.5e-4 5.0e-4 ResNet18 Top-K6.5e-4 1.5e-3 4.5e-3 Random-K4.0e-5 5.0e-5 2.0e-4 Periodic-K3.2e-4 7.5e-4 2.55e-3

where K denotes the number of retained gradient coordinates after compression, bv and bi represent the numbers of bits used to encode each gradient value and its corresponding index, respectively. B denotes the bandwidth. In our implementation, gradient values are represented using 32-bit floating point pre-cision ( bv = 32 ), while indices are encoded using log 2 d bits, where d denotes the dimensionality of the original gradient vector. The default communication bandwidth B is set to 50 Mbps. 

5) Baselines: Since existing adaptive gradient compression mechanisms mainly target compression-ratio adaptation in FL, they are not directly designed for heterogeneous strat-egy selection in FedKD. Therefore, we compare ASCEND with uniform compression baselines, where all clients adopt the same strategy, and an EXP3-based adaptive compression method. 

B. Experimental Results and Analysis 

We verify the effectiveness of the proposed ASCEND al-gorithm from multiple perspectives, including its performance on a real-world platform, comparison with different baselines at different levels of compression, robustness under varying levels of data heterogeneity and communication bandwidth, as well as the evolution of client-side strategy selection behaviors during training, and sensitivity analysis to investigate the impact of key hyperparameters. 

1) Performance on Real-World Platform: To demonstrate the practicality of the proposed ASCEND algorithm, we evaluate its performance on a real-world platform. The exper-iments are conducted on the MNIST dataset under different compression levels K ∈ { 5 × 10 3, 10 4}, covering relatively aggressive and moderate compression settings. The comparison of different methods under different com-pression levels on the MNIST dataset is presented in Fig. 4. We can observe that ASCEND achieves competitive performance across different compression levels, demonstrating its ability to effectively balance communication efficiency and model accu-racy. In particular, ASCEND achieves the best performance at the compression level K = 10 4. Furthermore, at the compres-sion level K = 5 × 10 3, ASCEND exhibits faster convergence 11 60 90 120 150 180 Time (s) 0.85 0.90 0.97 Accuracy 

(a) K = 5 × 10 360 90 120 150 180 Time (s) 0.85 0.90 0.97 Accuracy (b) K = 10 4Top-K Random-K Periodic-K EXP3 ASCEND-K 

Fig. 4: Comparison of different methods on the MNIST dataset deployed on a real-world platform under different compression levels ( α = 0 .5). Top-K Random-K Periodic-K EXP3 ASCEND-K 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 Time (s) 0.72 0.80 0.88 0.96 Accuracy 

(a) K = 5 × 10 20.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 Time (s) 0.78 0.84 0.90 0.96 Accuracy (b) K = 10 30.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 Time (s) 0.87 0.90 0.93 0.96 Accuracy (c) K = 5 × 10 3

Fig. 5: Comparison of different methods on the MNIST dataset under different compression levels ( α = 0 .5). 

in the early training stage. This behavior can be attributed to its adaptive strategy selection mechanism, which dynamically selects suitable compression strategies based on the observed utility estimates, thereby improving communication efficiency and accelerating empirical risk reduction. 

2) Performance Comparison with Baselines: Fig. 5 illus-trates the performance on MNIST under different compression levels K ∈ { 5 × 10 2, 10 3, 5 × 10 3}, corresponding to com-pression ratios of approximately 0.81% , 1.62% , and 8.10% for LeNet5 as the reference model. Fig. 6 presents the results on CIFAR-10 with K ∈ { 10 5, 5 × 10 5, 2 × 10 6}, corresponding to retained-gradient ratios of approximately 0.89% , 4.47% ,and 17 .88% for ResNet18 as the reference model. Generally, increasing K improves convergence speed and final accuracy because more gradient information is preserved. However, the optimal compression strategy varies across different compres-sion levels. For example, on MNIST, Top-K performs better when K = 5 × 10 2, while Random-K becomes more compet-itive at K = 5 × 10 3; similarly, on CIFAR-10, Top-K is more effective at K = 10 5, whereas Random-K shows advantages at larger budgets such as K = 2 ×10 6. Despite these variations, ASCEND consistently achieves strong performance across all compression levels, demonstrating its capability to adaptively balance the trade-off between communication efficiency and model accuracy. 

3) Performance under Varying Data Heterogeneity: To further evaluate the robustness of the proposed method under varying degrees of data heterogeneity, we conduct additional experiments on the MNIST dataset, where α ∈ { 0.1, 0.5, 1}

correspond to highly heterogeneous and nearly IID data distri-butions, respectively. In this experiment, the compression level is fixed at K = 10 3, and the communication bandwidth is set to 50 Mbps. As shown in Figs. 5 and 7, higher data heterogeneity (e.g., Top-K Random-K Periodic-K EXP3 ASCEND-K 40 80 120 160 200 Time (s) 0.32 0.40 0.48 0.56 Accuracy 

(a) K = 10 540 80 120 160 200 Time (s) 0.40 0.44 0.48 0.52 Accuracy (b) K = 5 × 10 580 120 160 200 Time (s) 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 Accuracy (c) K = 2 × 10 6

Fig. 6: Comparison of different methods on the CIFAR-10 dataset under different compression levels ( α = 0 .5). 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 Time (s) 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 Accuracy 

(a) α = 0 .10.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 Time (s) 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 Accuracy (b) α = 1 Top-K Random-K Periodic-K EXP3 ASCEND-K 

Fig. 7: Comparison of different methods on the MNIST dataset under different data heterogeneity levels ( K = 10 3). 20.0 30.0 40.0 50.0 Time (s) 0.78 0.84 0.90 0.96 Accuracy 

(a) 5 Mbps 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 Time (s) 0.78 0.84 0.90 0.96 Accuracy (b) 5 × 10 2 Mbps Top-K Random-K Periodic-K EXP3 ASCEND-K 

Fig. 8: Comparison of different methods on the MNIST dataset under different communication bandwidths ( α = 0 .5, K = 10 3 ). 

α = 0 .1) leads to slower convergence and lower final accu-racy. Nevertheless, across all settings, ASCEND consistently achieves competitive or superior performance compared to the best fixed compression strategy. 

4) Performance under Varying Communication Band-widths: To evaluate the robustness of the proposed method un-der varying communication bandwidths, we conduct additional experiments on the MNIST dataset, where the bandwidth is varied over {5 Mbps, 50 Mbps, 500 Mbps }, corresponding to different network conditions. Here, we set K = 10 3 and 

α = 0 .5.As shown in Figs.5 and 8, we can observe that a small band-width (e.g., 5 Mbps) introduces significant communication de-lays, under which Top-K tends to perform better. In contrast, higher bandwidth (e.g., 500 Mbps) improves convergence ef-ficiency, making Random-K more competitive. Nevertheless, across all settings, ASCEND consistently achieves competitive or superior performance, demonstrating its robustness under varying network conditions. 

5) Analysis of Client Compression-Strategy Selection: In this section, we analyze the compression strategy selection results of clients to better understand the selection dynamics of the proposed ASCEND algorithm during the training process. 12 Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Round 050 100 Average Usage Count 

(a) Model prototype = LeNet5Half 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Round 050 100 Average Usage Count (b) Model prototype = LeNet5 Fig. 9: Compression strategy selection results of different model prototypes on MNIST dataset ( α = 0 .5, K = 10 3). 

For the three candidate strategies, i.e., Top-K, Random-K,and Periodic-K, we record the average compression strategy selection counts for different prototypes during training. For MNIST with a small K = 10 3, as illustrated in Fig. 9, clients equipped with the lightweight LeNet5Half model pre-dominantly select the Top-K strategy, whereas those using the standard LeNet5 model exhibit a more balanced preference between Top-K and Random-K. This discrepancy can be attributed to differences in computational efficiency across model sizes. For smaller models such as LeNet5Half, Top-

K is more effective since the gradient dimension is relatively low, making the Top-K selection operation computationally efficient while preserving the most important gradient entries. In contrast, for larger models such as LeNet5, the cost of identifying Top-K entries becomes higher, and Random-K

provides a more efficient alternative with lower selection overhead while maintaining competitive training performance under the same communication constraints. In contrast, for a large K = 5 × 10 3 on MNIST, as shown in Fig. 10, both LeNet5Half and LeNet5 clients gradually shift their preference toward the Random-K strategy. At this compression level, more gradient entries can be transmitted, which narrows the performance difference among compres-sion strategies. As a result, the lower selection overhead of Random-K becomes more advantageous, leading to higher computational efficiency during training. The compression strategy selection results for CIFAR-10 under smaller and larger K values, i.e., K = 10 5 and K =2 × 10 6, are shown in Figs. 11 and 12, respectively. We can observe the same trend as MNIST. Overall, these observations indicate that the proposed ASCEND algorithm is capable of autonomously identifying effective compression strategies and adapting its decisions according to model architecture, resource constraints, and compression strategy features. 

6) Sensitivity Analysis: As shown in Fig. 13, the effects of the weighting parameters ρ and β in (30) are evaluated on different datasets. The parameter setting ρ = 0 .6 and β = 0 .4

achieves stable performance across both datasets. For adaptive strategy selection, the sensitivity of the hyper-parameter c in (35) is further investigated. As shown in Fig. 14, different values of c are evaluated to analyze their impacts on the performance of the proposed method. The results demonstrate that c = 3 achieves a good balance between exploration and exploitation, providing relatively favorable performance across different datasets. Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Round 050 100 Average Usage Count 

(a) Model prototype = LeNet5Half 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Round 050 100 Average Usage Count (b) Model prototype = LeNet5 Fig. 10: Compression strategy selection results of different model prototypes on MNIST dataset ( α = 0 .5, K = 5 × 10 3). Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 0 1500 3000 4500 6000 Round 0200 400 Average Usage Count 

(a) Model prototype = WResNet40-2 0 1500 3000 4500 6000 Round 0200 Average Usage Count (b) Model prototype = ResNet18 Fig. 11: Compression strategy selection results of different model prototypes on CIFAR-10 dataset ( α = 0 .5, K = 10 5). Top-K Random-K Periodic-K 0 1500 3000 4500 6000 Round 0100 200 Average Usage Count 

(a) Model prototype = WResNet40-2 0 1500 3000 4500 6000 Round 0200 Average Usage Count (b) Model prototype = ResNet18 Fig. 12: Compression strategy selection results of different model prototypes on CIFAR-10 dataset ( α = 0 .5, K = 2 × 10 6). 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 Time (s) 0.80 0.84 0.88 0.92 0.96 Accuracy 

(a) MNIST 45 60 75 90 Time (s) 0.45 0.48 0.51 0.54 0.57 Accuracy (b) CIFAR-10 ρ=0.4, β=0.6 ρ=0.5, β=0.5 ρ=0.6, β=0.4 ρ=0.7, β=0.3 

Fig. 13: Impact of the weighting parameters ρ and β on the performance under different datasets. 

VII. C ONCLUSION 

This paper proposes ASCEND, an adaptive heterogeneous compression framework for FedKD, where clients with het-erogeneous computation and communication resources can dynamically select suitable compression strategies. The com-pression strategy selection problem is formulated as a non-stationary stochastic MAB problem. Each client adaptively chooses among Top-K, Random-K, and Periodic-K using an EMA-enhanced ϵ-greedy policy with a time-aware reward. Experimental results on MNIST and CIFAR-10 under non-13 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Time (s) 0.80 0.84 0.88 0.92 0.96 Accuracy 

(a) MNIST 45 60 75 90 Time (s) 0.45 0.48 0.51 0.54 0.57 Accuracy (b) CIFAR-10 c = 1 c = 2 c = 3 c = 4 

Fig. 14: Impact of the hyperparameter c in the probability ϵt on the performance across different datasets. 

IID data and different bandwidth capacities demonstrate that ASCEND consistently achieves a favorable balance between model accuracy and training latency. Future work will inves-tigate the joint optimization of compression strategy selection and compression level adaptation, where the retained gradi-ent budget can be dynamically adjusted according to model performance and system conditions. REFERENCES [1] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent, A. Bellet, M. Bennis, A. N. Bhagoji, K. Bonawitz, Z. Charles, G. Cormode, R. Cummings et al. ,“Advances and open problems in federated learning,” Foundations and trends® in machine learning , vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021. [2] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proceedings of Machine learning and systems , vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2020. [3] C. Wu, F. Wu, L. Lyu, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “Communication-efficient federated learning via knowledge distillation,” Nature communications ,vol. 13, no. 1, p. 2032, 2022. [4] S. Shi, K. Zhao, Q. Wang, Z. Tang, and X. Chu, “A convergence analysis of distributed sgd with communication-efficient gradient sparsification.” in IJCAI , 2019, pp. 3411–3417. [5] A. Xu and H. Huang, “Detached error feedback for distributed sgd with random sparsification,” in International conference on machine learning .PMLR, 2022, pp. 24 550–24 575. [6] S. U. Stich, “Local sgd converges fast and communicates little,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09767 , 2018. [7] Y. Lin, S. Han, H. Mao, Y. Wang, and W. J. Dally, “Deep gradient compression: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01887 , 2017. [8] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015. [9] P. Han, X. Huang, Y. Fang, and G. Han, “Rethinking knowledge distil-lation in collaborative machine learning: Memory, knowledge, and their interactions,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering ,vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 4498–4530, 2025. [10] P. Han, Z. Yin, C. Liu, and Y. Fang, “Agentic AI-driven federated fea-ture distillation for adaptive resource–performance tradeoffs in wireless edge networks,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 12, pp. 6076–6088, 2026. [11] D. Li and J. Wang, “Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03581 , 2019. [12] Z. Zhu, J. Hong, and J. Zhou, “Federated learning with heterogeneous data: A generative approach,” in ICML . PMLR, 2021, pp. 12 804– 12 814. [13] Y. Tan, G. Long, L. Liu, T. Zhou, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Fedproto: Federated prototype learning across heterogeneous clients,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 8432–8440, 2022. [14] J. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Wu, and B. Li, “Fedtgp: Federated learning with global prototypes for heterogeneous models,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2023. [15] J. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Ma, H. Wang, W. Xu, and F. Wu, “Parameterized knowledge transfer for personalized federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02862 , 2021. [16] T. Lin, L. Kong, S. U. Stich, and M. Jaggi, “Ensemble distillation for robust model fusion in federated learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 2351–2363, 2020. [17] C.-Y. Chen, J. Choi, D. Brand, A. Agrawal, W. Zhang, and K. Gopalakr-ishnan, “Adacomp: Adaptive residual gradient compression for data-parallel distributed training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [18] P. Han, S. Wang, and K. K. Leung, “Adaptive gradient sparsification for efficient federated learning: An online learning approach,” in 2020 IEEE 40th international conference on distributed computing systems (ICDCS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 300–310. [19] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics . PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273– 1282. [20] X. Li, K. Huang, W. Yang, S. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “On the convergence of fedavg on non-iid data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189 , 2019. [21] W. Wen, C. Xu, F. Yan, C. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, and H. Li, “Terngrad: Ternary gradients to reduce communication in distributed deep learning,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [22] A. F. Aji and K. Heafield, “Sparse communication for distributed gradient descent,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05021 , 2017. [23] F. Haddadpour, M. M. Kamani, A. Mokhtari, and M. Mahdavi, “Feder-ated learning with compression: Unified analysis and sharp guarantees,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .PMLR, 2021, pp. 2350–2358. [24] D. Alistarh, D. Grubic, J. Li, R. Tomioka, and M. Vojnovic, “Qsgd: Communication-efficient sgd via gradient quantization and encoding,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [25] D. Basu, D. Data, C. Karakus, and S. Diggavi, “Qsparse-local-sgd: Distributed sgd with quantization, sparsification and local computations,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. [26] A. Koloskova, N. Loizou, S. Boreiri, M. Jaggi, and S. U. Stich, “A unified theory of decentralized SGD with changing topology and local updates,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119. PMLR, 2020, pp. 5381–5393. [27] P. Han, X. Shi, and J. Huang, “Fedal: Black-box federated knowledge distillation enabled by adversarial learning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 3064–3077, 2024. [28] B. E. Woodworth, K. K. Patel, and N. Srebro, “Minibatch vs local SGD for heterogeneous distributed learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, 2020. [29] S. P. Karimireddy, Q. Rebjock, S. U. Stich, and M. Jaggi, “Error feedback fixes SignSGD and other gradient compression schemes,” in 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning ,ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 97. PMLR, 2019, pp. 3252–3261. [30] P. Richt´ arik, I. Sokolov, and I. Fatkhullin, “EF21: A new, simpler, theoretically better, and practically faster error feedback,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, 2021. [31] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction ,2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018. [32] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust dis-tributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in International conference on machine learning . Pmlr, 2018, pp. 5650–5659. [33] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. Stich, and A. T. Suresh, “Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learn-ing,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 5132–5143. [34] A. Garivier and E. Moulines, “On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit problems,” in Algorithmic Learning Theory , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6925. Springer, 2011, pp. 174–188. [35] F. Liu, J. Lee, and N. Shroff, “A change-detection based framework for piecewise-stationary multi-armed bandit problem,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [36] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem,” Machine learning , vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 235– 256, 2002. [37] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 2002. [38] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep., 2009. 14 𝐀 + 1    

> p
> Client Client Server Prototype Local training Gradient compression
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> Gradient reconstruction
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> Logit calculation
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> Parameter averaging
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> Model updating
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> Logit averaging KD
> 𝐀 𝐀+1 𝐀
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀+1 𝐀
> 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 + 1
> Fig. 15: The pipeline of a single communication round in FedKD with heterogeneous compression.

APPENDIX 

To facilitate understanding in the theoretical analysis, we first present the overall workflow of a single communication round in Figure 15. 

A. Proof of Theorem 1 

We rearrange the training process from the perspective of each prototype. Specifically, at the beginning of training round 

t, the parameter of prototype p is ωpt . The server broadcasts the updated prototype model after each KD step, all clients belonging to the same prototype start each communication round with identical model parameters, i.e., 

ωnt = ωpt , ∀n ∈ N p. (55) For local training, we define the local optimization objective for prototype p as 

fp(ω) = 1

|N p|

X

> n∈N p

fn(ω), (56) where fp(ω) denotes the prototype-wise empirical loss. Based on the received compressed gradients from client n

in round t, the server reconstructs the corresponding gradient vector ˜gnt . The reconstructed gradient is used to update the local model of client n by 

˜ωnt = ωpt − ηt ˜gnt . (57) The server performs parameter-averaging for prototype aggre-gation as formulated in (4). Substituting (57) into (4), the prototype update can be equivalently written as 

¯ωpt = ωpt − ηt ¯gpt , (58) where the aggregated reconstructed gradient is defined as 

¯gpt = 1

|N p|

X

> n∈N p

˜gnt . (59) After prototype aggregation, the server performs one-step KD on the public dataset Dpub . The KD update is formulated as 

ωpt+1 = ¯ ωpt − ηKD ∇L pKD ( ¯ ωpt ), (60) where ηKD denotes the KD learning rate. For theoretical analysis, we define the joint optimization objective of prototype p as 

Fp(ωpt ) = fp(ωpt ) + λLpKD (ωpt ), (61) where λ balances the local optimization objective and the global knowledge alignment objective. Define ηKD ≜ λη t and substituting (58) into (60) yields 

ωpt+1 = ωpt − ηt (¯ gpt + λ∇L pKD ( ¯ ωpt )) . (62) For convenience, define the aggregated residual and stochas-tic gradient noise for prototype p as 

ept = 1

|N p|

X

> n∈N p

ent , (63) and 

ξpt = 1

|N p|

X

> n∈N p

(gnt − ∇ fn(ωpt )) . (64) Applying Assumption 3 and 4, the stochastic gradient noise satisfies 

E[ξpt |ωpt ] = 0 , (65) and 

E[∥ξpt ∥2] ≤ σ2. (66) We first propose the following lemma to show the smooth-ness of Fp(ω).

Lemma 4 (Smoothness of the Joint Objective) . The joint objective function Fp(ω) defined in (61) is L-smooth. Specif-ically, there exists a constant L = Ll + λL p > 0 such that 

∥∇ Fp(ω) − ∇ Fp(ω′)∥ ≤ L ∥ω − ω′∥ , ∀ω, ω′. (67) 

Proof. According to the definition of the joint optimization objective in (61), therefore, for any two model parameters ω

and ω′, the gradient difference can be written as 

∇Fp(ω) − ∇ Fp(ω′)= ∇fp(ω) − ∇ fp(ω′) + λ (∇L pKD (ω) − ∇L pKD (ω′)) .

(68) Taking the norm on both sides and applying the triangle inequality, we have 

∥∇ Fp(ω) − ∇ Fp(ω′)∥≤ ∥∇ fp(ω) − ∇ fp(ω′)∥

+ λ ∥∇L pKD (ω) − ∇L pKD (ω′)∥ .

(69) Applying Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 into the gradient difference bound yields 

∥∇ Fp(ω) − ∇ Fp(ω′)∥≤ Ll ∥ω − ω′∥ + λL p ∥ω − ω′∥

= ( Ll + λL p) ∥ω − ω′∥ .

(70) By defining the smoothness constant as 

L = Ll + λL p, (71) we obtain 

∥∇ Fp(ω) − ∇ Fp(ω′)∥ ≤ L ∥ω − ω′∥ , (72) which completes the proof. 15 

We then propose the following lemma to capture the devi-ation in each round t.

Lemma 5 (Error-feedback Decomposition under Heteroge-neous Compression) . For each prototype p, the deviation between the aggregated reconstructed gradient ¯gpt and the true prototype gradient satisfies 

¯gpt − ∇ fp(ωpt ) = ept−1 − ept + ξpt . (73) 

Proof. According to the error-feedback update, the residual vector at client n satisfies 

ent = unt − ˜gnt . (74) Using (10), therefore, 

˜gnt − gnt = ent−1 − ent . (75) By adding and subtracting ∇fn(ωpt ), we obtain 

˜gnt − ∇ fn(ωpt ) = ent−1 − ent

+ ( gnt − ∇ fn(ωpt )) . (76) Taking the average over all clients belonging to prototype p

gives 

¯gpt − ∇ fp(ωpt )=ept−1 − ept + ξpt , (77) which completes the proof. Now, we prove Theorem 1. 

Proof. According to Lemma 4, the joint objective function 

Fp(ω) is L-smooth. Therefore, we obtain 

Fp(ωpt+1 ) ≤Fp(ωpt ) + ∇Fp(ωpt ), ωpt+1 − ωpt

+ L

2 ∥ωpt+1 − ωpt ∥2. (78) According to the prototype update rule after parameter aggregation and KD, the prototype model is updated following (62). The definition of the aggregated gradient deviation, 

δpt = ¯ gpt − ∇ fp(ωpt ). (79) According to Lemma 5, the aggregated gradient deviation can be written as 

δpt = ept−1 − ept + ξpt . (80) From (61) and (79), the update direction can be rewritten as 

¯gpt + λ∇L pKD ( ¯ ωpt ) = ∇Fp(ωpt ) + δpt . (81) Therefore, by combining the result with (62), we have 

ωpt+1 − ωpt = −ηt (∇Fp(ωpt ) + δpt ) . (82) Substituting (82) into (78), we have 

Fp(ωpt+1 ) ≤Fp(ωpt ) − ηt ⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ∇Fp(ωpt ) + δpt ⟩

+ Lη 2

> t

2 ∥∇ Fp(ωpt ) + δpt ∥2. (83) For the inner-product term of (83), we have 

− ηt ⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ∇Fp(ωpt ) + δpt ⟩

= − ηt∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 − ηt ∇Fp(ωpt ), ept−1 − ept

− ηt ⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ξpt ⟩ . (84) Taking expectation and according to Assumption 3, the stochastic gradient noise term vanishes: 

E [⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ξpt ⟩] = 0 . (85) Therefore, 

E [−ηt ⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ∇Fp + δpt ⟩]= − ηtE ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 − ηtE  ∇Fp(ωpt ), ept−1 − ept

 .

(86) For the second-order term of (83), according to 

∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥a∥2 + 2 ∥b∥2,

we have 

Lη 2

> t

2 ∥∇ Fp(ωpt ) + δpt ∥2 ≤ Lη 2 

> t

∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 + Lη 2 

> t

∥δpt ∥2.

(87) According to Lemma 5, the aggregated gradient deviation can be decomposed as (80). Using the inequality 

∥a + b + c∥2 ≤ 3∥a∥2 + 3 ∥b∥2 + 3 ∥c∥2,

we obtain 

E ∥δpt ∥2 ≤3E ∥ept−1∥2 + 3 E ∥ept ∥2

+ 3 E ∥ξpt ∥2 . (88) By Assumption 4 and Assumption 5, we have, 

E ∥δpt ∥2 ≤ 3(2Γ max + σ2) ≜ Cg . (89) where Cg denotes the bounded gradient deviation constant induced by heterogeneous compression and stochastic opti-mization. Combining (86), (87) and (89), (83) becomes 

E Fp(ωpt+1 )

≤E [Fp(ωpt )] − (ηt − Lη 2 

> t

)E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2

− ηtE  ∇Fp(ωpt ), ept−1 − ept



+ Lη 2 

> t

Cg . (90) The accumulated residual term can be bounded by the error-feedback telescoping property. Specifically,  

> T−1

X

> t=0

(ept−1 − ept ) = ep 

> −1

− epT −1. (91) According to the standard error-feedback convergence prop-erty [29] and Assumption 5, the residual accumulation term is bounded by a finite constant:  

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηtE ⟨∇ Fp(ωpt ), ept−1 − ept ⟩ ≤ Ck, (92) where Ck is a finite constant related to the error-feedback residual bound. 16 

Summing (90) from t = 0 to T − 1 gives  

> T−1

X

> t=0

(ηt − Lη 2 

> t

)E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2

≤Fp(ωp

> 0

) − Fp(ωpT ) + Ck + LT η 2 

> t

Cg . (93) Since ηt ≤ 14L ,

ηt − Lη t2 ≥ 3ηt

4 , (94) therefore, 

3ηt

4 

> T−1

X

> t=0

E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2

≤Fp(ωp

> 0

) − F ∗ 

> p

+ Ck + LT η 2 

> t

Cg . (95) Dividing both sides by 3ηtT 

> 4

, we obtain 

1

T 

> T−1

X

> t=0

E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 ≤ 4( Fp(ωp

> 0

) − F ∗ 

> p

+ Ck)3ηtT + 4L

3 ηtCg .

(96) Therefore, by choosing 

ηt = O(1 /√T ),

the first term and the second term both decrease as O(1 /√T ).Therefore, 

1

T 

> T−1

X

> t=0

E ∥∇ Fp(ωpt )∥2 = O(1 /√T ). (97) 

B. Proof of Theorem 2 1) Proof of Lemma 1: Proof. When strategy s is selected, the EMA utility update follows (33). Within the segment Ti, by Assumption 6 and (38), the expected reward remains constant: 

E[Gnt (s)] = μni (s). (98) Subtracting μni (s) from both sides of (33) yields 

Qnt (s) − μni (s) =(1 − ηq )( Qnt−1(s) − μni (s)) + ηq (Gnt (s) − μni (s)) . (99) Taking expectation gives 

E[Qnt (s) − μni (s)] =(1 − ηq )E[Qnt−1(s) − μni (s)] . (100) Applying the above recursion for m updates gives 

E[Qnt (s) − μni (s)] = (1 − ηq )mE[Qnri (s) − μni (s)] . (101) Taking the absolute value on both sides gives (46). 

2) Proof of Lemma 2: Proof. During the exploration stage, ASCEND selects acompression strategy randomly with probability ϵt, as defined in (35). Therefore, the expected regret caused by exploration at communication round t is bounded by 

ϵt

 μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt ) . (102) Due to the reward clipping operation, the instantaneous regret is bounded by 

μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt ) ≤ ∆max . (103) Therefore, the cumulative exploration regret after T commu-nication rounds satisfies 

Rn

> explore

(T ) ≤ ∆max 

> T

X

> t=1

ϵt

≤ c∆max 

> T

X

> t=1

1

√t . (104) Using the integral inequality, 

> T

X

> t=1

1

√t ≤ 1 + 

Z T

> 1

x−1/2dx ≤ 2√T , (105) we obtain (47). 

3) Proof of Lemma 3: Proof. During the exploitation phase, ASCEND selects the compression strategy according to the current utility estima-tion: 

snt = arg max  

> s∈S

Qnt (s). (106) Define the utility estimation error as 

vnt (s) = Qnt (s) − μnt (s). (107) Since snt maximizes the estimated utility, 

Qnt (snt ) ≥ Qnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

). (108) Substituting Qnt (s) = μnt (s) + vnt (s) gives 

μnt (snt ) + vnt (snt ) ≥ μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) + vnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

). (109) Therefore, 

μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt ) ≤ vnt (snt ) − vnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

). (110) The instantaneous exploitation regret is 

μnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt ) ≤ | vnt (snt )| + |vnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

)|≤ 2 max  

> s∈S

|vnt (s)|. (111) Next, we analyze the cumulative estimation error within a stationary segment Ti. According to Assumption 6, the expected reward remains unchanged within each segment. The utility estimation error can be decomposed into the EMA bias and the stochastic fluctuation: 

vnt (s) = Qnt (s) − E[Qnt (s)] 

| {z }

> stochastic fluctuation

+ E[Qnt (s)] − μni (s)

| {z }

> EMA bias

. (112) 17 

According to Assumption 7 and Lemma 1, after Hni,t (s)

updates of strategy s, its utility estimation error satisfies 

E [|vnt (s)|] ≤ C1

q

Hni,t (s) ∨ 1+ C2(1 − ηq )Hni,t (s), (113) where a ∨ b = max {a, b }, and C1 and C2 are constants determined by the reward variance, EMA coefficient, and initialization error. Combining (113) with (111), the expected instantaneous exploitation regret at round t ∈ T i satisfies 

Eμnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt )

≤ C1

 1

q

Hni,t (snt ) ∨ 1+ 1

q

Hni,t (sn, ∗ 

> t

) ∨ 1



+ C2

h

(1 − ηq )Hni,t (snt ) + (1 − ηq )Hni,t (sn, ∗ 

> t)

i

. (114) Under Assumption 8, for every s ∈ S , (114) yields 

Eμnt (sn, ∗ 

> t

) − μnt (snt )

≤ 2C1

pπmin (t − ri + 1) + 2 C2(1 − ηq )πmin (t−ri+1) . (115) Summing (115) over t ∈ T i, we obtain 

Rn 

> exploit ,i

≤ 4C1

√πmin 

p|T i| + 2C2

1 − (1 − ηq )πmin .

Let 

Ce = 4C1

√πmin 

+ 2C2

1 − (1 − ηq )πmin , (116) where Ce is independent of |T i|. Since |T i| ≥ 1, we have 

Rn 

> exploit ,i

≤ Ce

p|T i|. (117) Finally, summing over all stationary segments gives 

Rn

> exploit

(T ) = 

> M

X

> i=1

Rn

> exploit ,i

≤ CeMX

> i=1

p|T i|≤ Ce

vuutM

> M

X

> i=1

|T i|

= Ce

√M T , (118) where the second inequality follows from the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. 

4) Proof of Theorem 2: Proof. We first analyze the regret incurred during the warm-up phase. During warm-up, each compression strategy is selected exactly h times to initialize the utility estimation. Therefore, the number of warm-up rounds is h|S| .Since the reward is clipped into [Gmin , Gmax ], the maximum instantaneous regret is bounded by (48). Therefore, the warm-up regret is bounded by 

Rn 

> warm

≤ h|S| ∆max . (119) Combining (119), Lemmas 2 and 3, we obtain 

Rn

> ASCEND

(T ) = Rn 

> warm

+ Rn

> explore

(T ) + Rn

> exploit

(T ),

(120) 

≤ h|S| ∆max + 2 c∆max 

√T + Ce

√M T . 

(121) Therefore, 

Rn

> ASCEND

(T ) = O(√M T ). (122)