Title: Understanding the Synchronization Tax in GPU Scale-Up Domains

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.22503v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 01:35:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Understanding the Synchronization Tax in GPU Scale-Up Domains 

Arjun Devraj Lindsey Bowen Rachee Singh 

Cornell University 

Abstract 

GPU scale-up domains have become the building block of modern machine learning infrastructure, and their design fol-lows a clear trajectory of exponential growth in both intercon-nect bandwidth and domain size. This paper argues that these two trends are in tension. Through a study of several hundred thousand collective operations across four language models and three recent GPU architectures, we find that GPUs within a scale-up domain arrive at collective barriers hundreds to thousands of microseconds apart, despite executing identical kernels on identical hardware over a uniform fabric. We call this waiting time the synchronization tax and show that it can consume over 50% of collective communication time in an 8-GPU scale-up domain. To understand the sources of this tax, we design a graph-based algorithm that operates on per-rank kernel traces, revealing that cross-rank variation in GEMM kernel execution times accounts for 78% of this overhead. We apply extreme value theory to model this variation and demonstrate that the synchronization tax grows with domain size. Folding this model into an augmented Hockney com-munication cost model, we show that the synchronization tax fundamentally limits the return on bandwidth scaling and inverts prevailing beliefs about how interconnect bandwidth should scale with domain size. 1

1 Introduction 

The scale-up domain is the fundamental building block of modern machine learning infrastructure. Within a single scale-up domain—a multi-GPU server or an entire rack—GPUs communicate over an any-to-any fabric that delivers band-width orders of magnitude higher than the datacenter network (e.g., NVIDIA DGX servers and NVL72 racks). Per-GPU bandwidth in these domains has tripled from 300 GB/s on A100 to 900 GB/s on B200, domain size has grown from 8 GPUs to 72, and announced roadmaps extend to 1,152 GPUs and 10 PB/s of aggregate bandwidth [57, 78] (Fig-ure 1, left). This trajectory reflects an architectural bet that tightly coupled high-bandwidth domains are the right sub-strate for the collective communication patterns of tensor par-allelism (TP), expert parallelism (EP), and fully sharded data parallelism (FSDP) that govern the efficiency of large-model training [26, 36, 52, 55, 63, 65]. 

> 1

Correspondence to adevraj@cs.cornell.edu 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026                       

> Launch year
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> GPU-GPU  Bandwidth  (TB/s)
> V100/ NVLink 2A100/ NVLink 3H100/ NVLink 4Blackwell/ NVLink 5Rubin/ NVLink 6
> Link bandwidth Scale-up size
> Link bandwidth (B)Communication  time  (T)
> +sync tax
> B*tax B*base
> No sync tax With sync tax
> %T
> %B=
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175
> Number  of  GPUs

Figure 1: Inter-GPU link bandwidth and scale-up domain size have both grown exponentially in recent years (left). However, the syn-chronization tax also increases with scale (§5). This tax imposes a lower bound on communication time that cannot be improved by adding bandwidth, reducing the optimal bandwidth requirement, i.e., B∗ 

> tax

< B∗ 

> base

(right), in scale-up domains. 

The conventional view is that this bet pays off. Every GPU pair in a scale-up domain observes uniform latency and band-width over a dedicated fabric, and practitioners often treat the domain as a single large accelerator. Under this view, the bandwidth of the interconnect and the volume of data that GPUs exchange are the only factors that bound the perfor-mance of collectives. The path to faster training within a scale-up domain then reduces to scaling interconnect bandwidth and domain size in lockstep with model size and accelerator FLOPS, as prescribed by the roofline model [17, 70]. This paper questions that view. Distributed ML executes as a sequence of compute phases separated by collective communication operations, in which every GPU in the scale-up domain exchanges and combines intermediate results before the next phase can begin. Each col-lective is bulk-synchronous by construction, requiring every participating GPU to reach a synchronization barrier before data transfers can begin. Ranks that reach the barrier early must wait until the slowest rank arrives, and the time they spend idle is time the interconnect cannot recover. We call this waiting time the synchronization tax , a barrier-induced idle time that is inherent to collective communication. To quantify the tax, we profile supervised fine-tuning of four large language models (Llama [65], Qwen [74], DeepSeek [36]) on scale-up domains spanning three GPU architectures (A100, H100, H200) and analyze over 244,710 collective operations. Across every configuration, GPUs in the scale-up domain arrive at barriers hundreds to thousands of microseconds apart, even though they execute identical ker-nels on identical hardware over a uniform fabric. In an 8-GPU 1arXiv:2608.22503v1 [cs.DC] 23 Aug 2026 scale-up domain, the median-finishing rank can spend up to 80% of its TP communication time waiting for the slowest rank to arrive. For Llama-3 70B on the DGX H200, the fastest rank spends a median of 40%, and at worst nearly all, of its TP communication time waiting before data transfer begins. The identity of the slowest rank shifts from one collective to the next, ruling out a single faulty device as the cause [26, 35, 73]. While establishing that the synchronization tax exists is one matter, explaining where it comes from is more challenging. In a distributed training job, the CPU dispatches GPU kernels asynchronously, and a proprietary GPU scheduler executes each kernel once its dependencies are satisfied. The depen-dency that ultimately gates a collective on the slowest rank is resolved only at runtime, and any of the hundreds of kernels preceding the collective is a potential culprit. Stream-level parallelism on GPUs compounds the difficulty. Kernels on different CUDA streams execute concurrently on the same rank, so a kernel that looks slow in isolation may not lie on the critical path that delayed the collective. The gating event need not even be a GPU kernel; a delayed CPU-side launch can be equally responsible. Post-hoc attribution of a synchronization delay to a specific root cause is therefore far from trivial. Our way through this attribution problem begins with a simple structural observation. Every collective communica-tion instance is preceded by a well-defined barrier-to-barrier 

set of events that execute between collectives in the same parallelism dimension. Because a preceding collective forces all ranks to synchronize, any synchronization delay observed at the collective must originate within this set, which bounds the search for culprits. We use this bound by constructing a dependency graph over the GPU and CPU events of the slowest rank within the barrier-to-barrier set, and isolating the sequence of events on the critical path that culminated in the delayed collective. We validate our algorithm by confirming that the attributed critical-path variation accurately predicts observed synchronization delays ( R2 ≈ 1), and through con-trolled delay-injection experiments that verify it correctly recovers induced critical paths (§4). Applying this algorithm to over 244,710 collective operations across all of our traces reveals a common culprit: cross-rank variation in GEMM kernel execution times drives 78% of the synchronization tax. Given this variation across GPUs performing identical work, we argue that the synchronization tax is a fundamental consequence of distributed ML in the scale-up domain. Next, we turn to its implications for the design of future scale-up domains. Today’s approach for scaling the bandwidth of GPU interconnects is primarily guided by the roofline model, which argues that bandwidth should scale linearly with accelerator FLOPS [70]. However, this view neglects a critical dimension of modern scaling trends: the size of the scale-up domain. Since synchronization is governed by the maximum execution time across GPUs, we use extreme value theory (EVT) from statistics to model tail behavior, showing that the synchroniza-tion tax grows with GPU cluster size. We apply EVT to model the maximum GEMM kernel execution time across ranks and validate that the resulting analytical model accurately predicts the synchronization delays observed in our traces. Building on this, we develop a bandwidth scaling model that explicitly accounts for the synchronization tax. Our model shows that as the size of the scale-up domain grows, synchro-nization overheads increase (as shown by EVT), effectively 

taxing the benefits of additional bandwidth (Figure 1, right). Applying our model, we find that interconnect bandwidth requirements decrease with scale-up domain size, yielding 2.06 × lower optimal bandwidth necessary for a 512-GPU vs. 8-GPU scale-up domain. For large scale-up domains, our model predicts that even conservative estimates of the syn-chronization tax reduce bandwidth-to-FLOPS scaling require-ments by 11.7% relative to the roofline. 

2 Background 

In this section, we introduce the architecture of GPU scale-up domains (Figure 2), describe how distributed ML workloads execute on them, and define the synchronization tax. 

2.1 Scale-Up Network Architecture 

A scale-up domain is a set of GPUs interconnected by a high-bandwidth fabric within a single physical enclosure, typically a multi-GPU server or, in the latest generations, a full rack. In today’s scale-up domains, every GPU can communicate with every other GPU over a dedicated interconnect that is orders of magnitude faster than the datacenter network, which connects scale-up domains to one another. Any-to-Any Switched Fabric (e.g. NVSwitch)       

> GPU 0 HBM GPU 1 HBM GPU 2 HBM GPU 3 HBM GPU 4 HBM GPU 5 HBM GPU 6 HBM GPU 7 HBM
> Host CPU Scale-out NIC
> Scale-up domain
> —NVLink - -PCIe
> Figure 2: A scale-up domain in the form of a multi-GPU server with 8 GPUs, each with local HBM, connected by a high-bandwidth switched fabric enabling any-to-any communication. The host CPU dispatches kernels over PCIe, and a NIC links to the datacenter network. Communication within the dashed enclosure uses only the scale-up interconnect ( e.g., NVLinks). Larger rack-sized scale-up domains ( e.g., NVL72) follow a similar design.

Interconnect. Modern scale-up domains connect GPUs us-ing high-bandwidth interconnects, such as NVIDIA’s NVLink and NVSwitch. NVLink [47] provides point-to-point bidirec-tional links between GPUs, and NVSwitch [25, 47] provides contention-free any-to-any GPU communication. Table 1 sum-marizes the progression of scale-up domains over recent GPU generations. Per-GPU NVLink bandwidth has grown from 300 GB/s on A100 to 900 GB/s on B200, and the domain size has expanded from 8 to 72 GPUs, with planned expansion up to 1,152 GPUs with 10 PB/s aggregate bandwidth [57]. 

Topology. NVIDIA’s scale-up domains provide a fully con-nected topology where every GPU pair has a direct path with 2A100 [40] H100 [41] H200 [42] B200 [44] NVLink BW (GB/s/GPU) 300 450 450 900 GPUs per domain 8 8 8 72 HBM capacity (GB) 80 80 141 192 HBM BW (TB/s) 2.0 3.35 4.8 8.0 

Table 1: Characteristics of modern scale-up domains. uniform latency/bandwidth. Similarly, Huawei’s CloudMa-trix connects 384 Ascend 950 accelerators with an all-to-all network [78]. This contrasts with scale-out networks ( e.g., 

InfiniBand [45], RoCE [48]), which connect servers through multi-hop topologies with variable congestion. The uniform, high-bandwidth scale-up fabric rules out topology, routing asymmetry, and link contention as causes of the performance variation we observe in collective communication. 

2.2 Distributed ML in Scale-Up Domains 

Large language model (LLM) training distributes compu-tation across GPUs with various parallelization strategies. Within a scale-up domain, the most common strategies are tensor parallelism (TP) and fully sharded data paral-lelism (FSDP), which are often composed as hybrid paral-lelism [38, 63]. In particular, tensor-parallel collective com-munication lies on the critical path of every training iteration, making it especially sensitive to the synchronization tax. 

Tensor parallelism partitions individual matrix operations across GPUs. Each GPU computes a slice of a matrix multiply, and the partial results are combined through an A LL REDUCE 

collective—or, equivalently, R EDUCE SCATTER followed by ALL GATHER —at the end of each transformer sublayer. Be-cause this collective sits on the critical path of every layer, TP is typically restricted to the scale-up domain, where NVLink provides the highest bandwidth for optimal communication. 

Fully sharded data parallelism shards model parameters, gradients, and optimizer states across GPUs. Before each layer’s forward pass, an A LL GATHER collective reconstructs the full tensor from its shards. After the backward pass, a REDUCE SCATTER distributes and reduces gradients. FSDP is often applied across a wider group of GPUs than TP and is frequently composed with TP in hybrid-parallel settings. 

Kernel execution model. A training iteration executes as a stream of GPU kernels , both compute ( e.g., GEMMs, atten-tion) and collective communication ( e.g., ALL REDUCE ). The host CPU dispatches these kernels asynchronously onto one or more CUDA streams per GPU, without waiting for any ker-nel to complete before issuing the next. The GPU hardware scheduler then executes each kernel once its stream-order and cross-stream dependencies are satisfied [46]. As a result, the actual start of the kernel is determined by the joint state of the CPU dispatch queue and the GPU’s internal scheduling state at runtime. In multi-GPU jobs, each GPU is typically managed by a separate CPU process [34]. 

Collectives as synchronization barriers. Collective oper-ations, implemented by collective communication libraries (CCLs) like NVIDIA’s NCCL, act as implicit synchronization barriers in distributed ML. An A LL REDUCE , for example, cannot execute until it has received input from every rank, and the corresponding NCCL kernel on each rank begins execut-ing only after the preceding compute kernel on that rank has completed. If one rank finishes its preceding compute later than the others, the collective kernels on faster ranks must wait. All ranks finish the collective near simultaneously, since the network delay is similar in the ideal any-to-any fabric of the scale-up domain, but they may begin it at different times; the gap between a GPU’s collective start time and the latest start time across ranks constitutes its wait time. 

2.3 The Synchronization Tax 

The wall-clock time of a collective decomposes into two distinct phases. The first is a wait phase , during which the GPU idles while waiting for the slowest rank to arrive. By definition, the slowest rank, i.e., straggler, skips this phase. The second is a transfer phase , during which all ranks have entered the collective and the data exchange proceeds. 

Transfer phase. CCLs implement collectives using opti-mized parallel algorithms that minimize communication time. Researchers have designed these algorithms using the Hock-ney ( α−β) cost model [21], which is the standard communi-cation cost model for distributed ML [60, 67, 72]. Under the Hockney model, the time to transmit S bytes over a link is 

α + S · β, where α is the fixed startup latency of each message and β = 1/B given a link bandwidth of B. Thus, the time to complete a collective is T = p · α + q · S · β, where p and q are the coefficients on the latency and bandwidth costs. p and q

are determined by the algorithm used for the collective. 

Wait phase. The Hockney model captures the performance of the transfer phase but not the wait phase. However, the wait phase is fundamental to collective communication, where many GPUs must synchronize. We define the synchronization delay (or synchronization tax ) for rank i ∈ { 1, . . ., n} as 

τi = tstart  

> i

(l) − min  

> j∈{ 1,... n}

tstart  

> j

(l), (1) where tstart  

> i

(l) denotes the time when rank i enters collective l.Unless otherwise specified, we use τ to denote the expected 

(i.e., mean) synchronization delay experienced across ranks. We refer to τ as the synchronization tax because it reduces training efficiency and, as we show in §6, effectively taxes 

the gains from scaling link bandwidth and cluster size. A key property of the synchronization tax is that it is in-dependent of the interconnect bandwidth. While bandwidth determines the duration of the data transfer phase once all ranks have entered the collective, it does not affect the idle time incurred at the barrier. Using extreme value theory from statistics, we show that as scale-up domains grow in size, τ in-creases and occupies a greater share of collective latency (§5); this severely diminishes the returns from increasing scale-up interconnect bandwidth (§6). 30 20 40 60 80 % of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 CDF                                         

> Llama-3 8B
> 020 40 60 80 100 %of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 CDF
> Qwen-3 32B
> 020 40 60 80 100 %of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 CDF
> Llama-3 70B
> 020 40 60 80 100 %of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 CDF
> DeepSeek-V3 16B
> A100 EP A100 TP A100 H100 H200 Fastest Median

Figure 3: CDFs of the synchronization tax—shown as the percent of NCCL collective communication time that the fastest and median ranks spend waiting—across TP collectives (R EDUCE SCATTER ) for all workloads and architectures (with EP for DeepSeek). 

3 Measuring the Synchronization Tax 

In this section, we measure the synchronization tax across ML workloads and scale-up domains, finding that it already constrains communication performance today. 

3.1 Experimental Setup 

We conduct experiments on three recent NVIDIA GPU ar-chitectures: A100, H100, and H200. The A100 experiments run on both NERSC’s Perlmutter supercomputer [39], which provides nodes of four 40GB-A100 GPUs connected via NVLink 3, and on commercial cloud instances [58] with 4–8 80GB-A100 GPUs per node. The H100 and H200 experi-ments run on 8-GPU cloud instances with NVLink 4 (Hopper). Table 2 summarizes the configurations. 

ML models and configurations. We study four language models of increasing size: Llama-3 8B [19], DeepSeek-V3 16B [36], Qwen-3 32B [74], and Llama-3 70B [19]. All exper-iments perform supervised fine-tuning using the torchtitan 

training framework [34]. We use local batch sizes of 4 for the Llama models and 8 for the Qwen model, and 2 for DeepSeek-V3 16B (as it runs on the smaller 40GB-A100 Perlmutter nodes), and sequence lengths of 4096 for Llama/DeepSeek and 8192 for Qwen; these combinations saturate GPU mem-ory, reflecting realistic training scenarios. Table 2 summarizes our workloads. DeepSeek-V3 is a mixture of experts (MoE) model, so we also evaluate expert parallelism (EP), which shards experts across GPUs and incurs frequent A LL TOALL 

communication. (Unlike TP, which evenly partitions work across ranks, EP can incur load imbalance [33, 53, 56].)                                    

> Model Params Precision GPUs TP FSDP EP Architectures Llama-3 8B FP32 44––A100, H100, H200 DeepSeek-V3 16B BF16 842(4,8) A100 (40 GB HBM) Qwen-3 32B FP32 88––A100, H100, H200 Llama-3 70B BF16 842–A100, H100, H200

Table 2: Workload configurations. 

3.2 Profiling Methodology 

We profile training iterations using PyTorch’s built-in Kineto profiler [51], which uses the CUDA Profiling Tools Inter-face (CUPTI) to record timestamped GPU kernel executions, CUDA API calls, CUDA driver and runtime events ( e.g., ker-nel launches, cudaStreamSynchronize ) and CPU-side C++ functions, at μs resolution. Kineto offers low-overhead pro-filing, critical for collecting frequent, per-rank traces without distorting runtime behavior. Each rank produces a JSON trace with per-event records that include the timestamp, duration, kernel name, CUDA stream identifiers, etc. For all workloads (Table 2), we collect traces every 5–10 iterations for a total of 50–100 iterations. Each workload generates several GB of trace data, and we analyze 244,710 collective operations in total. We then complete three processing steps. • Extracting events. We parse the trace for each rank and sort its events by timestamp. We use the metadata to identify each process group , i.e., a subset of ranks that participate in the same set of collectives. For example, an FSDP+TP job creates one process group for TP and another for FSDP. We associate each NCCL kernel event with the CUDA stream assigned to its process group using the trace metadata, en-abling us to isolate the synchronization tax per group. • Aligning ranks. For each process group, we extract the or-dered sequence of operations on its dedicated GPU stream. This sequence captures communication for a single paral-lelization dimension. Because CUDA streams are ordered, we align traces across ranks by matching events at the same index. We validate this alignment by confirming that the 

end times of each collective kernel agree across ranks. • Computing the synchronization tax. For each matched collective instance, we extract the NCCL kernel duration on every participating rank. The key observation is that all ranks complete a given collective at approximately the same wall-clock time because the NVSwitch fabric delivers uni-form bandwidth and every rank exchanges the same volume of data (corroborated by our cross-rank alignment checks and §4). Therefore, variation in NCCL kernel durations across ranks directly reflects variation in entry times: ranks that enter the collective earlier exhibit longer NCCL kernel durations because they spend the wait phase inside the ker-nel, while the slowest rank (last to enter) has the shortest duration. We compute two measures of τl for each collec-tive l: the maximum minus the minimum NCCL kernel duration across ranks, and the median minus the minimum. 43.3 Severity of the Synchronization Tax 

Figure 3 shows the CDFs of the synchronization tax across all TP R EDUCE SCATTER collectives (and EP A LL TOALL ’s) for every workload and GPU model in our study. The synchro-nization tax is severe across all 10 configurations: even in an 8-GPU scale-up domain, the median-finishing rank can spend over 80% of its communication time simply waiting on the slowest rank. This trend worsens with hardware generation. For the largest model (Llama-3 70B) and latest GPU archi-tecture evaluated (H200), the fastest rank spends a median of 40% and, at worst, nearly all of its R EDUCE SCATTER time waiting to begin data transfer. For DeepSeek, the median rank spends over 60% of its EP communication time waiting. We also show the synchronization tax is high for FSDP in §A. This result contradicts popular intuition that a tightly cou-pled scale-up domain should behave as a single deterministic accelerator. GPUs in a scale-up domain are architecturally identical, share a uniform NVSwitched fabric with high band-width and low latency, and execute identical work under TP, yet routinely arrive at each collective barrier hundreds to thou-sands of microseconds apart. Moreover, these delays are not caused by a single faulty device, as the identity of the slow-est rank shifts over time. Our findings suggest that the syn-chronization tax is intrinsic to scale-up GPU communication, rendering solutions such as manually replacing hardware or restarting the job ineffective. 

4 Tracing the Synchronization Tax 

While our measurements in §3 quantify the severity of the synchronization tax, in this section we aim to understand the sources of these delays. We design an algorithm that identi-fies and traces through the critical path before the collective to attribute the observed synchronization delay to the dif-ferences in various preceding operations across ranks. Only operations on this path receive blame for contributing to the synchronization tax, since concurrent but unrelated operations are inherently excluded. This enables us to identify the most common operations that contribute to the synchronization tax (§4.3). As we show in §B, recent works [3, 20] adopt heuristics that fail to accurately capture the critical paths at the 10 −μs , per-collective granularity we seek. 

The search problem. Our task is to identify the sequence of events on the critical path of each rank before every collective instance. Formally, let xi, j denote the duration of event j on rank i, and let Pi(l) denote the sequence of events the algo-rithm infers on i’s critical path before collective l. Then, the path length on rank i for l is 

S(l) 

> i

= ∑

> j∈P(l)
> i

x(l)  

> i,j

.

We denote the NCCL kernel duration on rank i for collec-tive l as y(l) 

> i

. Our goal is to identify paths such that the cross-rank spread in these estimates matches the observed synchronization-induced variation in NCCL kernel durations: max  

> i

y(l) 

> i

− min  

> i

y(l) 

> i

≈ S(l) 

> arg min iy(l)
> i

− S(l) 

> arg max iy(l)
> i

. (2) We refer to the LHS of Eq. 2 as the communication variation ,

i.e., synchronization delay between the fastest and slowest ranks before the collective, and the RHS as the compute vari-ation , which captures the difference in the total preceding duration of rank-specific operations ( e.g., GPU compute ker-nels, kernel launches, CPU operations) between the slowest and fastest ranks. Note that y(l) 

> i

is always larger on the fastest rank due to the wait time, and S(l) 

> i

should always be larger on the slowest rank when the algorithm finds the correct path. 

Technical challenges. Attributing synchronization delay to operations is harder than measuring it. First, each rank’s trace for a single iteration can contain tens of thousands of events across CPU and GPU, and events often overlap across execu-tion contexts ( e.g., CPU threads, GPU streams). Further, the critical path must respect real hardware/system behavior and CPU-GPU interactions. Thus, naively optimizing Eq. 2 leads to a large combinatorial search that could produce infeasible paths. Finally, for the same collective l, the critical paths may diverge across ranks, complicating cross-rank time alignment. 

Key insights. Since every collective forces all participating ranks to synchronize, its end time serves as a common refer-ence to align time across ranks. For a given collective l, the synchronization tax accumulates over the interval since the previous collective along each rank’s critical path, constituting a barrier-to-barrier set . However, because these paths may diverge, we only have to trace back to the most recent common collective across the critical paths of all ranks in the group to accurately capture the shared accumulation window for the synchronization delay. We design a polytime graph-based algorithm that identifies the critical path on each rank for all exposed collectives (TP, EP), validate it via delay injection, and verify that it satisfies Eq. 2. 

4.1 Dependency Graph Construction 

First, we construct a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to capture event dependencies for each rank in each iteration of a trace. 

Nodes. Each node in the DAG represents a single event: either a GPU kernel execution or a CPU-side operation (including kernel launches). The node stores the event’s name, start timestamp, duration, and thread/stream identifier. We also add a root node that connects to the first event in each queue. Constructing CPU nodes requires a more involved ap-proach. When using the torchtitan framework, the Kineto profiler only logs C++ functions and CUDA API calls, often missing Python-only operations. Thus, we reconstruct a con-sistent execution timeline by chunking the nested structure of recorded events into exclusive time slices per-thread. This not only recovers Python-level overheads, but also enables finer-grained attribution of CPU-side costs, since raw operation durations can be misleading when nested child calls are the true source of latency. Chunking preserves ordering while ac-5s k2                           

> g1g2
> l0l1l2
> Rank 0
> sk2
> g1g2
> l0l1l2
> Rank 1Rank 0
> l2
> k2g2
> l1
> sg1
> l0
> Rank 1
> l2
> k2g2
> l1
> sg1
> l0
> CPU event GPU Comp. GPU Comm. Start Comm. Critical Path
> Figure 4: Left shows an execution trace with 2 ranks, where sdenotes stream synchronize and k2denotes the kernel launch for collective event
> l2. Rank 0 is the straggler for collective l2(shorter duration, i.e., no wait); rank 0’s critical path for l2is gated by its CPU kernel launch while rank 1’s stays on GPU. Right shows our graph construction of the trace. While rank 1’s path hits the previous collective l1, rank 0’s does not, so they must trace back to their lowest common ancestor, l0, for accurate time alignment.

counting for profiling gaps and function calls, enabling more accurate attribution of CPU-driven delays across ranks. 

Edges. We first group GPU events into distinct queues ac-cording to their thread/stream ID and sort each resulting queue by start-timestamp. We then process GPU events in chrono-logical order across queues and add up to four edges: • Stream-order edges. If the same CUDA stream has a prior event, we add an edge from that predecessor to the current event, to capture a possible dependency due to sequential, blocking execution within a GPU stream. • Cross-stream edges. To discover possible dependencies be-tween streams, we maintain a min-heap of in-flight events keyed by their completion time (start time + duration). When we process a new event at time t, we pop all heap entries whose completion time is at or before t and add an edge to the current event, as it is the latest operation that could have delayed the current event. We then push the new event onto the heap with its own completion time. • Launch edges. We connect each CPU-side kernel launch to the GPU kernel it dispatches, linked via the CUPTI correla-tion identifier that the profiler assigns to both events. • Synchronization edges. For cudaStreamSynchronize and related events, we identify the most recently completed GPU operation before the event and add an edge to the parent CPU event of the synchronization event. There-fore, kernel-launch edges connect CPU to GPU while stream/device-synchronization edges connect GPU to CPU. 

4.2 Critical-Path Extraction 

After constructing the DAG for a rank, we find the critical path preceding each collective. We iterate through each collective 

l for a given dimension ( e.g., TP) in chronological order and then align these paths across ranks to calculate the compute variation. Figure 4 and §C further describe our algorithm. 

Traversal. For each rank, we start from the collective node 

l and traverse upwards in the DAG. At each node, we select the parent with the latest completion time, as this is the parent most likely to have delayed the current event. When multi-ple parents complete near-simultaneously, we apply a 3 μstolerance: if the parent on the same stream completes within this threshold of the latest parent, we prefer the same-stream parent since same-stream execution is inherently sequential. The traversal terminates when it reaches an earlier collective on the same stream (or the root); the final node in the traversal is the ancestor of l on that rank. 

Alignment. We now have each rank’s ancestor and critical path for l. However, these paths may terminate at different an-cestors across ranks ( e.g., due to CPU-side divergence on one rank). To enable meaningful comparison, we must align ranks by traversing up to the lowest common ancestor (LCA) among all ranks. This ensures that the resulting path lengths corre-spond to the same logical execution window across ranks. 

Attribution. We focus on identifying operations along the critical path that exhibit the greatest variation across ranks, as this variation drives the synchronization tax. While existing solutions report the longest-running operations e.g., Kineto, they do not capture cross-rank variation or attribute it along the critical path. Consistently long operations are not prob-lematic if their durations are similar across ranks. To isolate sources of variation, we analyze the critical path of the slow-est rank and compare each event to the corresponding event by name and index on the fastest rank’s critical path. If no corresponding event exists, the variation is taken as the full duration of that event. The event with the largest variation is then identified as the primary culprit for that rank’s delay. 

4.3 Evaluation and Results 

We evaluate our algorithm using two methods. First, if the se-lected events drive synchronization delay, their compute-time variation should strongly correlate with the synchronization tax at the collective. Second, we inject delays into previously non-critical operations to construct controlled critical paths and verify that our method recovers them. 

Correlational validation. We run the algorithm on every collective instance across all models, GPU architectures, and parallelism dimensions (TP, EP, FSDP) measured (Table 2). (See §A for EP and FSDP.) Figure 5 directly compares the exact quantities on the left-hand and right-hand sides of Eq. 2, 

i.e., the measured synchronization delay at the collective vs. the cumulative compute variation between the slowest and fastest ranks identified by our algorithm. This reflects the ac-curacy of our critical-path algorithm because only operations on the true critical path can induce cross-rank differences in collective entry times; accurately recovering these paths 6Figure 5: Synchronization delay ( y) vs. critical-path cross-rank compute variation identified by our algorithm. Each point is one collective l.The strong correlation confirms that the critical path identified by our algorithm tracks the synchronization tax. 

implies that their cumulative durations match the observed cross-rank variation in collective communication time. Best-fit lines for every workload yield slopes and R2 values of ≈ 1, thereby ruling out the hypothesis that the synchronization tax arises from factors outside the identified critical-path set ( e.g., 

OS jitter, CCL-internal scheduling). 

Interventional validation. We evaluate attribution accuracy via an interventional experiment using 4-way TP across 4 A100 GPUs with Llama-3 8B. Starting from a control run, we inject delays into CPU-side GEMM kernel launches during the training iteration using a custom TorchDispatchMode 

handler. In typical workloads, the CPU issues numerous ker-nel launches asynchronously, causing these kernels to depend on the completion of the prior same-stream kernel before exe-cuting rather than the launch itself. However, when adding the 

treatment condition, we inject a delay (ranging from 0–20 ms across all experiments) to the kernel launch, creating a new dependency on the CPU. Thus, if our algorithm has correctly identified the critical path, the percent of CPU-side events de-tected to be on the critical path should increase with injected delay, and this trend should match the observed communi-cation delay. Figure 5 shows how as more delay gets added to the previously non-critical operation, the delay becomes dominant over the preceding kernel time, inducing a CPU-side kernel-launch dependency that our algorithm correctly captures as increased cross-rank critical-path variation that results in proportionally higher synchronization delays. 0.000 ms 5.000 ms 10.000 ms 20.000 ms       

> CPU-Side Injected Delay
> 0.000 5.000 10.000 15.000 20.000 CPU-Driven  Comp.  Var.  (ms)
> Alg.-Identified Comp. Variation Actual Comm. Variation 0.000 5.000 10.000 15.000 20.000
> Comm.  Variation  (ms)

Figure 6: We inject a delay of x ms before the CPU launch of the first GEMM after a collective. This intervention makes CPU launch the bottleneck; our algorithm correctly attributes this variation to the CPU, and both attributed critical-path variation and the synchroniza-tion tax match the injected delay. 

GEMMs take the blame. We classify operations identified by our algorithm to be on the critical path by name, e.g., gemm 

and nvjet identify GEMMs. For 93.7% of collectives across all workloads, the straggler’s critical path lies entirely on GPU. Thus, the scale-up synchronization tax is primarily driven by GPU compute variation across ranks and not CPU kernel launches (only 6.3%). In Table 3, we report in aggregate the top 5 classes of GPU kernels responsible for the synchroniza-tion tax, as per our culprit attribution method. GEMM kernels drive 78% of this variation, followed by FlashAttention, and are thus the clear contributors to the synchronization tax.          

> GEMM FlashAttention FSDP Norm Concat/Split % of Total GPU Compute Variation 78.0% 15.4% 4.3% 1.2% 0.6%

Table 3: Top 5 kernels responsible for GPU compute variation. 

4.4 Sources of GEMM-Kernel Variation 

We also briefly explore potential causes of this cross-rank variation in TP GEMM kernel execution times. We first rule out trivial explanations, namely work imbalance and rank-dependent sparsity. First, we confirm that work is perfectly balanced across ranks: GEMM matrix dimensions are identi-cal across ranks for each kernel index. Next, we investigated the impact of rank-dependent matrix sparsity, but verified that GEMMs are consistently dense across ranks (0% sparsity). 

SM clock frequency. GPUs independently modulate clock frequencies to manage power via DVFS [2]. Thus, at any point in time, two GPUs may be running at different clock frequencies. To investigate whether this drives the variation in execution times, we profile 20 training iterations of Llama-3 8B on 4 A100s on the same server using TP. We pin all GPU clocks at 1320 MHz using nvidia-smi -lgc and compare to a control run on the same server with default clock settings. Figure 7 shows that while pinning GPU clocks can reduce the synchronization tax, it does not eliminate it (left) and increases GEMM kernel runtime by more than 10%. 0 20 40 60 80 % of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 CDF SGEMM 64×32 SGEMM 128×128 TN SGEMM 128×128 NN 05000 10000 15000 Dur.  Sums  (ms) Default Clock Fixed Clock Fastest Median 

Figure 7: Impact of pinned vs. fixed GPU SM clocks on synchro-nization tax and GEMM kernel runtime. 

Memory access. We use NVIDIA’s ncu profiler [49] to col-lect detailed metrics about kernel execution during a Llama-3 8B training run on 4 A100s. ncu instruments individual GPU 7kernels with multiple replays and collects fine-grained hard-ware performance counters. We conduct two independent profiling runs of the ampere_sgemm_128x128_nn kernel— one with the cache-control option ( i.e., cache flushed between consecutive iterations) and one without. Each run executes 70 profiling iterations. For each kernel instance, we order the 4 ranks by their latency, i.e., increasing kernel execution time. Figure 8 shows that across kernel instances in both runs, the number of DRAM sectors read increases with rank latency. This suggests that the cross-rank GEMM runtime variation that drives the synchronization tax may result from differences in GPU memory behavior: slower ranks read more DRAM sectors, consistent with less effective cache utilization or instance-specific differences in memory access patterns. 1 2 3 4                 

> Rank, by latency (4=straggler)
> 7.780 7.782 7.784 7.786 7.788 7.790
> DRAM  Sectors  Read  1e7 Cache Preserved (Run 1)
> 1234
> Rank, by latency (4=straggler)
> 7.7800 7.7825 7.7850 7.7875 7.7900
> DRAM  Sectors  Read  1e7 Cache Flushed (Run 2)

Figure 8: ncu profiling of the ampere_sgemm_128x128_nn kernel during Llama-3 8B training on a 4-A100 GPU node. 

5 Modeling the Synchronization Tax 

Thus far, we have experimentally studied the synchronization tax in modern scale-up domains and used our critical-path algorithm (§4.2) to identify its dominant source: cross-rank variation in the execution times of GEMM kernels across ranks, despite identical kernel dimensions and matrix sizes. This observation significantly narrows the modeling space, allowing us to focus on GEMM-driven cross-rank variability. In this section, we quantitatively model the synchronization tax using GEMM-driven compute variation and show that even conservative estimates guarantee that it will grow as the scale-up domain expands. 

5.1 Applying Statistical Extreme Value Theory 

The synchronization tax is fundamentally a tail phenomenon. In each collective operation, the tax is set by the single slowest rank among the n ranks to reach the barrier. Therefore, we seek to characterize the behavior of the maximum of a sample, which is the object of study in extreme value theory (EVT). This branch of statistics provides a natural framework for this analysis, as it characterizes the distribution of sample maxima under general conditions. While EVT describes asymptotic behavior, its general results have been used to model real-world sample maxima across many disciplines. We use EVT to provide a conservative estimate of the synchronization tax, i.e., excluding less predictable phenomena that occur in addition to routine compute variation. 

Setup. Consider a collective with n participating ranks. Let 

X1, . . . , Xn denote the critical-path computation time on each rank (§4), which we treat as approximately i.i.d. draws from a distribution F. This approximation is justified by the fact that all ranks execute the same kernels on identical hard-ware. While we occasionally observe dependencies between ranks ( e.g., NUMA node placement), we note that EVT does not strictly require i.i.d. samples and tolerates both weak de-pendence across ranks and non-stationarity [31]; our model validation further confirms this (§5.3). The synchronization tax is governed by the sample maximum Mn = max i∈[n] Xi.Similar to the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) for sample means, EVT provides limiting distributions for the sample maximum. The Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko Theorem states that if the maximum of i.i.d. samples converges in distribution, then the limit must be a generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution [31]. This general result provides a powerful tool to study the behavior of the maximum execution time among n samples ( i.e., ranks executing the same compute kernels before the collective) regardless of the underlying kernel runtime distribution. 

The GEV distribution is defined by its location ( μ), scale (σ > 0), and shape ( ξ) parameters. The shape parameter ξ

dictates the tail behavior: ξ > 0 yields a heavy-tailed Fréchet distribution, ξ < 0 yields a bounded Weibull, and ξ → 0 yields the light-tailed Gumbel. 

Fixing the shape parameter. A distribution converges to the Weibull form of the GEV distribution when it has a finite up-per bound ( e.g., a hard timeout), i.e., values above this bound occur with strictly zero probability. Thus, we can safely rule out the Weibull distribution because GPU hardware does not impose a strict timeout or upper bound on the execution time of a kernel. Between the remaining Fréchet and Gumbel dis-tributions, our analysis focuses primarily on the light-tailed Gumbel because it provides the most conservative estimate of the synchronization tax over the heavy-tailed Fréchet. How-ever, as we detail below, our empirical data is better fit by the Fréchet distribution (§E), so our results provide a rough lower 

bound on the synchronization tax at scale. 

Leveraging max-stability. A key property of the GEV family is max-stability : the maximum of k i.i.d. samples drawn from a GEV distribution is itself GEV-distributed with the same shape parameter. As a result, once we fit a Gumbel distribu-tion ( ξ = 0) for a fixed sample size m, we can extrapolate its behavior in a larger cluster n under the following derivation. If X ∼ Gumbel (μ, σ), then E[X] = μ + γ σ , where γ ≈ 0.577 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. By max-stability, the max-imum of k i.i.d. samples from Gumbel (μ, σ) is distributed as Gumbel (μ + σ ln (k), σ) [6]. Thus, the expected maximum value in a cluster of size n = km is 

E[Mn] = E

 k

max 

> u=1

 m

max  

> i=1

Xi



= μ + σ(ln (k) + γ). (3) Max-stability allows us to predict the distribution of the max-imum across larger numbers of ranks without requiring addi-tional measurements, enabling us to estimate the synchroniza-tion tax at larger cluster sizes. Eq. 3 indicates that at best , the synchronization tax grows logarithmically with the number 8of GPUs in the scale-up domain. 

5.2 Fitting the Empirical Data 

Across all workloads (Llama-3 8B, n = 4, FP32; Qwen-3 32B, 

n = 8, FP32; Llama-3 70B, n = 8, BF16) and GPU architec-tures (A100, H100, H200), we fit the GEV distribution on all compute blocks, i.e., distinct sequence of kernels between con-secutive TP collectives (§D), that consist of GEMM kernels. We fit to compute blocks instead of individual GEMM kernel runtimes because each compute block can consist of several back-to-back GEMM kernels; modeling skew at the kernel level would thus require capturing the dependence structure across kernels. For example, assuming independence would 

under-estimate compute skew, as kernels may consistently run longer on one rank during a particular compute block. While we could obtain best-fitting parameters for each unique compute block on each GPU model and workload, we instead opt for a more general approach by first converting GEMM compute-block execution times into z-scores ( i.e., 

standard scores) that eliminate workload- and architecture-specific effects. The GEV distribution is obtained from the sample maxima given a fixed sample size, m. Thus, we fix 

m=4, since this is the smallest TP group size across all of our workloads. (For the Qwen-3 32B workload with 8-way TP, we assign odd ranks to one “sample” and even ranks to the other to ensure m=4.) Then, for each unique compute block c,we iterate over all instances j of it in the trace, and calculate the z-score of the maximum value among the m ranks: 

zc, j = Mc, j − ¯Xc, j

sc,pooled 

(4) where Mc, j is the raw maximum value of the j-th instance of compute block c across the m ranks, ¯ Xc, j is the mean value, and sc,pooled is the pooled standard deviation across all in-stances of c (see §F). We note that while different compute blocks may exhibit different GEV shapes, fitting the z-scores to the Gumbel distribution ensures that we arrive at the most conservative estimate of the synchronization tax. We then fit the distribution of all z-scores to the GEV distri-bution using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which is the standard approach for computing best-fit parameters. How-ever, to enable extrapolating behavior beyond our data, we fix the shape parameter as ξ = 0 for the Gumbel distribution, in order to provide a lower-bound estimate of the synchroniza-tion tax. Figure 9 shows the Gumbel distribution fitted to our data. While the probability density function (PDF) fits well (Figure 9, left), the QQ plot (Figure 9, right) suggests that the Gumbel distribution under-estimates the synchronization delay in our data, as empirical quantiles for larger z-scores fall 

above the fitted distribution’s predicted quantiles. This further confirms that the Gumbel distribution yields a conservative estimate of the tax. In §E, we allow the shape parameter ( ξ) to vary and find that MLE fits ξ = 0.15, which falls in the heavy-tailed Fréchet domain. This suggests that the synchronization tax is even higher than our lower-bound estimates.    

> Figure 9: Gumbel distribution fitted to z-scores of the maxima of cross-rank compute-block execution times ( zc,jin Eq. 4) across all hardware architectures and workloads.

While our model predicts a z-score for the expected max-imum runtime of a compute block c across ranks, we con-vert it back to time units using the inverse standardization, 

Mc = ¯Xc + sc,pooled · z. More generally, given a compute block 

c with mean a ≈ ¯Xc and standard deviation b ≈ sc,pooled , we calculate the synchronization tax for an n-GPU cluster as 

τ = E[Mn] − E[ ¯X] = b(μ + σ(γ + ln (k))) , (5) where μ and σ are the fitted Gumbel parameters, b is an empiri-cal estimate of the specific kernel or compute block’s standard deviation ( i.e., s c,pooled ), and k = n/m with m being the origi-nal block size for fitting the Gumbel distribution. We find that the coefficient of variation ( r, standard deviation / mean) is typically stable across workloads and compute blocks, so one can simply fix the value of r and substitute b = ra .Figure 10 shows the distribution of the underlying block maxima ( i.e., M c, j across compute blocks c and instances j)used to fit z-scores, segmented by GPU model and kernel pre-cision. BF16 kernels on newer GPU models (H100/H200) ex-hibit the heaviest tails. In contrast, FP32 kernels show weaker tail behavior but have substantially longer execution times, which amplifies the synchronization tax in absolute terms. 

5.3 Evaluating the Fitted Model 

We now evaluate how well the fitted, general Gumbel distribu-tion predicts the synchronization tax observed in our empirical data. Specifically, for the largest evaluated workloads—Qwen-3 32B and Llama-3 70B—we compare the mean predicted straggler delay (from our model) with the mean empirical straggler delay. In this case, the straggler delay refers to the av-erage amount of time spent waiting before beginning the col-lective across all ranks. This evaluation captures (1) whether variation in compute times across ranks for the preceding compute block explains the observed straggler delay, and (2) if our model can accurately predict the exact value of the ex-pected delay at the collective, i.e., synchronization tax. Since our focus is only on modeling the synchronization tax re-sulting from routine variation in GPU kernel execution time before the collective, we constrain our evaluation to those collective operations for which our algorithm (§4) traversed GPU-only paths with GEMM kernels, thereby excluding rare but extreme CPU-driven sources of variation. Figure 11 shows that our model effectively predicts the syn-chronization tax across workloads and GPU models. For the 90 2 4 6 8 10                              

> Straggler slowdown (% over mean)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> CDF FP32 compute kernels
> A100 (n=98,880) H100 (n=99,122) H200 (n=99,282) 0246810
> Straggler slowdown (% over mean)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> CDF BF16 compute kernels
> A100 (n=80,505) H100 (n=71,609) H200 (n=74,241) A100 H100 H200 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Kernel  runtime  (ms)  Runtime by precision
> FP32 BF16

Figure 10: Variation across ranks across each instance of a GPU compute kernel (attention, GEMM). Straggler slowdown reflects the maximum value’s percent increase in runtime over the mean for each instance of the kernel ( i.e., (Mc, j − ¯Xc, j)/ ¯Xc, j). 0 1 2                                            

> Unique compute block
> 02000 4000 6000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (a) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, A100
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 01000 2000 3000 4000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (b) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H100
> 0123
> Unique compute block
> 01000 2000 3000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (c) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H200
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 0200 400 600
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (d) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, A100
> 01
> Unique compute block
> 0100 200 300
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (e) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H100
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 0200 400 600
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (f) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H200 Mean empirical ±SEM Predicted

Figure 11: Validation of our synchronization delay model. For each unique compute block (x-axis), we compare the predicted expected delay—–derived from the fitted Gumbel distribution and z-score conversion—to the empirically observed mean synchronization delay across all collectives following the given compute block. §D shows example mappings from the unique compute block ID per workload on the x-axis to the corresponding sequence of GEMM kernels. 

vast majority of workloads, our model slightly underpredicts 

the synchronization tax, as expected due to the heavier-tailed empirical distribution in Figure 9 and §E. Moreover, while we fit the Gumbel distribution using m=4 group sizes, our Qwen-3 32B workloads used a TP group size of 8, so our evaluation further confirms that our model is effective at predicting the synchronization tax at scales larger than our fitted data (as we plug in k = 8/4 = 2 for the Qwen workloads). Our result shows that a simple model based solely on GEMM variability can accurately predict the observed synchronization tax dur-ing collective operations across workloads, GPU models, and even larger cluster sizes than those used for fitting. 

6 Scaling Bandwidth, Productively 

In this section, we incorporate our model of the synchroniza-tion tax into an augmented model of collective communication to quantify the optimal bandwidth requirement as scale-up domains expand. While both bandwidth and FLOPS evolve with system design, we focus here on bandwidth scaling with system size, and defer joint scaling considerations to §6.2. Specifically, we adapt the classical Hockney model [21] and derive a formulation for the optimal bandwidth requirement using elasticity measures . Recall from §2 that the Hockney model specifies a collective’s runtime as T = p · α + q · S · β,where link bandwidth B plays a key role as β = 1/B.

6.1 A New Analytical Model 

The synchronization tax τ adds a fixed overhead before the first round of communication, where all ranks must wait for the slowest. While this tax is often incurred from variation in GPU kernel execution times across ranks, it is fundamentally a communication problem, as the tax is only paid when GPUs communicate . Thus, we model communication time as 

T = p · α + q · S · β + τ = p · α + q · S( 1

B ) + τ. (6) 

Bandwidth elasticity. Next, we reason about the bandwidth requirements of scale-up communication under both the clas-sical model and our model (with τ). While increasing band-width will always reduce communication time, we ask, at which point does adding more bandwidth become ineffective? 

To answer this, we use elasticity, a concept in economics that quantifies the responsiveness of one variable to changes in another. Specifically, we use the elasticity of communica-tion time with respect to bandwidth, which captures the effi-ciency with which additional bandwidth is converted into re-duced communication time. In our setting, elasticity character-izes when communication enters the synchronization-bound regime, where performance is bottlenecked by the bandwidth-independent term τ, and additional bandwidth yields marginal improvements. Applying the standard definition of elasticity, we derive the bandwidth elasticity in our model as 

εB = ∂T /T

∂B/B = BT · ∂T

∂B = −q · SB(p · α + q(S/B) + τ) . (7) 10 εB lies in the range (−1, 0), where εB = −1 indicates that a 1% increase in bandwidth reduces communication time by 1%, while εB → 0 indicates that increasing bandwidth provides negligible speedup. Solving Eq. 7 for B, we can obtain the optimal bandwidth B∗ that satisfies elasticity εB:

B∗ = − (1 + εB) · q · S

εB(p · α + τ) . (8) Eq. 8 shows that the optimal bandwidth decreases as the synchronization tax increases. The elasticity εB captures the target return on bandwidth investment: values near -1 require near-proportional reductions in communication time, while values near 0 tolerate marginal gains. In economic terms, 

|ε| < 1 corresponds to diminishing returns. We use εB = −0.5as a concrete operating point, as it represents severe dimin-ishing returns where the bandwidth-sensitive component of communication equals the synchronization floor. 

Optimal bandwidth with scale. We now substitute the value derived in Eq. 5 for τ in Eq. 8, yielding 

B∗ = − (1 + εB) · q · S

εB[p · α + b(μ + σ(γ + ln k))] . (9) Because q is asymptotic in n (as today’s bandwidth-optimal algorithms achieve q = 2(n − 1)/n, see §6.2) while the syn-chronization tax scales logarithmically (at best), B∗ decreases 

as n increases (recall that k = n/m, where n is the size of the cluster and m is a constant from fitting the GEV distribution in §5). Moreover, kernels with higher variance, via b, also reduce B∗. Our findings in Figure 10 indicate that variation is higher for BF16 and for newer GPU models, suggesting that the tax is likely to remain a challenge. 

6.2 Applying the Model 

To analyze the optimal bandwidth B∗ at scale, we use our measurements of Llama-3 70B training on the DGX H200 (i.e., largest model and latest GPU architecture among those evaluated) as a reference and compute B∗ using both our model (Eq. 9) and the Hockney model as a baseline. We first evaluate solely scaling the scale-up domain size, since this avoids making assumptions about how FLOPS and model sharding will scale and grounds our evaluation in concrete empirical data we have collected for H100 GPUs; then, we simulate jointly scaling FLOPS with cluster size to provide end-to-end bandwidth scaling principles. We compute B∗ for the baseline as per Eq. 8 (excluding 

τ). We use the largest tensor-parallel buffer size observed in the Llama-3 70B H200 trace for S and calculate α ≈ 5μs ex-perimentally by running the nccl-tests [43] A LL REDUCE 

benchmark for large buffers (1–4 GB) on a DGX H200 and solving the resulting system of equations for α. (Our α ≈ 5 μs 

closely matches the expected NVLink latency of 3 μs [15].) We note that buffer size does not scale with cluster size, as model sharding is fundamentally limited by GPU memory capacity; in our Llama-3 70B workload, GPU memory is already fully utilized. For our model, we use the universal 

z-score fitted Gumbel parameters from §5.1 for μ and σ, and the mean values of r (coefficient of variation, ≈ 0.02 in our data) and a (average block computation time) observed across compute blocks in the empirical trace to calculate b = ra . We provide results with more models and with the best-fitting (Fréchet domain) distribution in §G. 

Topologies and algorithms. The p and q coefficients in Eq. 9 emerge from the Hockney model, and depend on the collec-tive and the topology/algorithm. We focus on A LL REDUCE 

(i.e., REDUCE SCATTER + A LL GATHER ), which is widely ob-served to dominate communication volume and frequency in scale-up workloads due to its pervasive use in tensor-parallel (TP) training [38, 63]. We also evaluate EP A LL TOALL for switched scale-up domains, but note that it plays a minimal role in driving bandwidth requirements due to small, irregular transfers that are typically latency-dominated [16, 24, 53]. We consider the three popular scale-up topologies used to-day: (1) Ring , which has been the historical scale-up network of choice, and is heavily optimized for with NCCL’s default Ring A LL REDUCE [23]; (2) 3D Torus , which is used by AWS’s Trainium [1] and Google’s TPU v4 [27] architectures (with 4096 TPUs per pod); and (3) Fully Connected , which is NVIDIA’s scale-up topology (via NVLink/NVSwitch [47]), with extensions planned up to 1,152 GPUs [57]. Since our focus is on bandwidth, we use the p and q values of the bandwidth-optimal algorithm (used for large buffers) for each topology given a cluster size of n GPUs: Ring algo-rithm with p = 2(n − 1) for (1), 3D Bucket (multidimensional ring) with p = 6( 3

√n − 1) for (2), and MSCCL’s 2-Phase All-Pairs [7], with p ≈ 2 for (3). For all three algorithms, 

q = 2(n−1) 

> n

(i.e., bandwidth-optimal bound). The A LL RE- 

> DUCE

algorithm we use for (3) is also the bandwidth-optimal ALL TOALL algorithm for switched topologies, so our results for (3) also enable reasoning about expert parallelism. In Figure 12, we show the optimal bandwidth B∗ pre-dicted by our model vs. the standard Hockney model for both 

εB = −0.5 (severe diminishing returns, with 0.5 × ROI) and 

εB = −0.1 (very severe diminishing returns, with 0.1 × ROI). Across all topologies and εB values, our model consistently predicts significantly lower bandwidth requirements because the synchronization tax exacerbates diminishing returns. We predict 37.26% and 98.69% lower optimal bandwidth require-ments for the ring and fully connected topologies, respectively, at n=128 and 81.67% lower bandwidth for the 3D Torus at 

n=512. We use the conservative Gumbel estimate of the syn-chronization tax (§5), so predictions from our model may even understate bandwidth requirements. For the ring topology, our model and the baseline predict similar B∗ at scale because the linear α (latency) cost of the ring algorithm dominates even the synchronization tax at scale. For the 3D torus, our model consistently predicts lower 

B∗ than the baseline because the synchronization tax exceeds even the O( 3

√n · α) communication latency at scale. While today’s model would predict that bandwidth should increase 

with cluster size on switched, fully connected scale-up do-11 10 1 10 2 10 3                              

> N(# GPUs)
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)
> (a) Ring
> 10 110 210 3
> N(# GPUs)
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)
> (b) 3D Torus
> 10 110 210 3
> N(# GPUs)
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)
> (c) Ideal Fully Connected
> Baseline, =-0.1 w/ sync tax, =-0.1 Baseline, =-0.5 w/ sync tax, =-0.5 NVLink (450 GB/s)

Figure 12: Optimal link bandwidth B∗ across common scale-up topologies as cluster size increases (Gumbel). 

mains due to minimal latency costs (suggesting we have am-ple room for more bandwidth up to ∼ 53 TB/s), our model suggests the opposite trend due to the synchronization tax. In fact, we predict that at the largest scale of n=4096, bandwidth is already saturated with today’s 450 GB/s H200 NVLinks. More generally, our model indicates that for the same GPU hardware generation, larger clusters should provision lower bandwidth ( e.g., 2.06 × lower for n=512 vs. n=8), reversing the conventional intuition that interconnect bandwidth must scale with system size. The large values predicted by the baseline help explain current bandwidth scaling targets. 

End-to-end scaling laws. Using the same setup, we also explore how inter-GPU link bandwidth should scale with FLOPS. We simplify the analysis by fixing S and α at the same values as above. In this case, we modify Eq. 6 to model the end-to-end runtime (both compute and communication) as T = p · α + q · S( 1 

> B

) + τ + a, where a is the mean compute block runtime. When deriving the expression for B∗, both our model and the baseline now add a to the denominator (Eq. 9); 

εB now reflects the sensitivity of end-to-end time to link band-width increases. In this analysis, we ground εB empirically by plugging in B=450 GB/s (H200 NVLink bandwidth) and other parameters into Eq. 7 and solving for εB.We then calculate B∗ using this value of εB as FLOPS scale. Since our empirical estimate of a—the mean preced-ing compute-block time—was collected from an H200 GPU, which supports 989 BF16 peak TFLOPS, we divide the value of a by the factor increase in TFLOPS and calculate B∗ ac-cordingly. To capture the trend in expanding scale-up domains alongside FLOPS, we provide results for n=256 and n=4096 in Figure 13. Both the baseline and our model predict that bandwidth should scale with FLOPS; however, our model sug-gests bandwidth should grow more slowly, predicting 11.7% lower bandwidth scaling requirements than the baseline. 

7 Related Work 

Bandwidth scaling. Hardware scaling is primarily driven by the roofline model [13, 14, 17, 70, 72], which argues that bandwidth should scale linearly with FLOPS. We qualify this statement by incorporating cluster size : due to the syn-chronization tax, bandwidth should scale more slowly with FLOPS as scale-up domains expand. While researchers have studied synchronization in both HPC and earlier ML work-1 5 10 15 20                

> PFLOPS
> 0246810
> Optimal  bandwidth  (TB/s)
> (a) N=256
> 1510 15 20
> PFLOPS
> 0246810
> Optimal  bandwidth  (TB/s)
> (b) N=4096
> Baseline w/ sync tax (Gumbel) w/ sync tax (best fit)

Figure 13: Inter-GPU link bandwidth vs. FLOPS scaling. Best-fit bar corresponds to best MLE fit, i.e., Fréchet (§E). 

loads [18, 22, 62, 64], they do not model the synchronization tax or bandwidth requirements for today’s LLM workloads. 

ML synchronization. Recent work has highlighted synchro-nization challenges in large-scale ML datacenters [9, 10, 26, 28,30,35,69,73,75]. However, these works focus on scale-out 

stragglers caused by specific non-intrinsic sources of varia-tion, unlike the focus of our general analytical framework. 

Trace analysis. Several works identify critical paths in ML jobs that are responsible for slowdowns [8, 11, 75], but target specific causes, e.g., severe node-specific slowdowns, scale-out network failures. In contrast, we design an algorithm to find any operations that directly contribute to the scale-up synchronization tax. Other works investigate stragglers through trace analysis, but use general heuristics to detect anomalies [20, 35], not the per-collective granularity we seek. 

Collective communication. Recent work has explored topology-specific collective algorithms, novel collective com-munication abstractions, and parallelization strategies [4, 7, 29, 37, 59–61, 68, 71, 76, 77]. Other works study opportunities for compute-communication overlap [5, 12, 32, 50, 54, 66], which is also present in our analysis (via FSDP). However, overlap does not change the synchronization requirement ( i.e., 

all ranks must contribute data to the collective), and would only further reduce bandwidth requirements with even less communication on the critical path. 

8 Conclusion 

As GPU scale-up domains grow exponentially in both size and bandwidth, we demonstrate that these two trends fundamen-tally conflict. Through empirical studies of ML workloads in scale-up domains, we observe a significant synchronization tax during GPU collective communication, primarily arising from cross-rank variation in GEMM kernel execution times. 12 Using insights from statistics and economics, we expose a critical trade-off: expanding the size of GPU clusters incurs a higher synchronization tax, making higher inter-GPU link bandwidth less effective at reducing communication time. 

References 

[1] AWS. Amazon EC2 Trn2 architecture, 2026. AWS Neuron Documentation. [2] Srikant Bharadwaj, Shomit Das, Kaushik Mazumdar, Bradford M Beckmann, and Stephen Kosonocky. Pre-dict; don’t react for enabling efficient fine-grain dvfs in gpus. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 , pages 253– 267, 2023. [3] Anupam Bhatnagar and Meta Platforms, Inc. Trace analysis for the masses. PyTorch Blog, 2023. [4] Zixian Cai, Zhengyang Liu, Saeed Maleki, Madanlal Musuvathi, Todd Mytkowicz, Jacob Nelson, and Olli Saarikivi. Synthesizing optimal collective algorithms. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming ,pages 62–75, 2021. [5] Chang Chen, Xiuhong Li, Qianchao Zhu, Jiangfei Duan, Peng Sun, Xingcheng Zhang, and Chao Yang. Cen-tauri: Enabling efficient scheduling for communication-computation overlap in large model training via commu-nication partitioning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Vol-ume 3 , pages 178–191, 2024. [6] Stuart Coles, Joanna Bawa, Lesley Trenner, and Pat Do-razio. An introduction to statistical modeling of extreme values , volume 208. Springer, 2001. [7] Meghan Cowan, Saeed Maleki, Madanlal Musuvathi, Olli Saarikivi, and Yifan Xiong. MSCCLang: Microsoft Collective Communication Language. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , pages 502–514, 2023. [8] Weihao Cui, Ji Zhang, Han Zhao, Chao Liu, Jian Sha, Bo Sang, Bingsheng He, Minyi Guo, and Quan Chen. FLARE: Anomaly diagnostics for divergent LLM train-ing in GPU clusters of Thousand-Plus scale. In 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 26) , pages 1021–1035, 2026. [9] Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The tail at scale. 

Communications of the ACM , 56(2):74–80, 2013. [10] Yangtao Deng, Xiang Shi, Zhuo Jiang, Xingjian Zhang, Lei Zhang, Zhang Zhang, Bo Li, Zuquan Song, Hang Zhu, Gaohong Liu, et al. Minder: Faulty machine detec-tion for large-scale distributed model training. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25) , pages 505–521, 2025. [11] Yangtao Deng, Lei Zhang, Qinlong Wang, Xiaoyun Zhi, Xinlei Zhang, Zhuo Jiang, Haohan Xu, Lei Wang, Zuquan Song, Gaohong Liu, et al. Mycroft: Tracing dependencies in collective communication towards reli-able llm training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , pages 254–269, 2025. [12] Arjun Devraj, Eric Ding, Abhishek Vijaya Kumar, Robert Kleinberg, and Rachee Singh. Efficient allre-duce with stragglers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23523 ,2025. [13] Nan Ding, Brian Austin, Yang Liu, Neil Mehta, Steven Farrell, Johannes P Blaschke, Leonid Oliker, Hai Ah Nam, Nicholas J Wright, and Samuel Williams. A work-flow roofline model for end-to-end workflow perfor-mance analysis. In SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–15. IEEE, 2024. [14] Nan Ding and Samuel Williams. An instruction roofline model for gpus. In 2019 IEEE/ACM Performance Mod-eling, Benchmarking and Simulation of High Perfor-mance Computer Systems (PMBS) , pages 7–18. IEEE, 2019. [15] Eliot Eshelman. DGX A100 review: Through-put and hardware summary, 2020. https: //www .microway .com/hardware/dgx-a100-review-throughput-and-hardware-summary/. [16] Trevor Gale, Deepak Narayanan, Cliff Young, and Matei Zaharia. Megablocks: Efficient sparse training with mixture-of-experts. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , 5:288–304, 2023. [17] Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Sehoon Kim, Coleman Hooper, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. AI and memory wall. IEEE Micro , 44(3):33–39, 2024. [18] Seokjin Go, Joongun Park, Spandan More, Hanjiang Wu, Irene Wang, Aaron Jezghani, Tushar Krishna, and Divya Mahajan. Characterizing the efficiency of distributed training: A power, performance, and thermal perspective. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture , pages 626–642, 2025. [19] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, 13 Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. [20] Yu Guan, Zhiyu Yin, Haoyu Chen, Sheng Cheng, Chao-jie Yang, Kun Qian, Tianyin Xu, Yang Zhang, Hanyu Zhao, Yong Li, et al. Perftracker: Online performance troubleshooting for large-scale model training in pro-duction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08528 , 2025. [21] Roger W. Hockney. The communication challenge for MPP: Intel Paragon and Meiko CS-2. Parallel Comput-ing , 20(3):389–398, 1994. [22] Torsten Hoefler, Timo Schneider, and Andrew Lums-daine. Characterizing the influence of system noise on large-scale applications by simulation. In SC’10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE International Con-ference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–11. IEEE, 2010. [23] Zhiyi Hu, Siyuan Shen, Tommaso Bonato, Sylvain Jeaugey, Cedell Alexander, Eric Spada, James Dinan, Jeff Hammond, and Torsten Hoefler. Demystifying NCCL: An in-depth analysis of gpu communication pro-tocols and algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04786 ,2025. [24] Changho Hwang, Wei Cui, Yifan Xiong, Ziyue Yang, Ze Liu, Han Hu, Zilong Wang, Rafael Salas, Jithin Jose, Prabhat Ram, et al. Tutel: Adaptive mixture-of-experts at scale. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems ,5:269–287, 2023. [25] Alexander Ishii and Ryan Wells. The nvlink-network switch: Nvidia’s switch chip for high communication-bandwidth superpods. In 2022 IEEE Hot Chips 34 Symposium (HCS) , pages 1–23. IEEE Computer Society, 2022. [26] Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Yinmin Zhong, Qi Huang, Yangrui Chen, Zhi Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Xiang Li, Cong Xie, Shibiao Nong, et al. MegaScale: Scaling large language model training to more than 10,000 GPUs. In 

21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24) , pages 745–760, 2024. [27] Norm Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subra-manian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, et al. Tpu v4: An optically reconfigurable supercomputer for machine learning with hardware support for embeddings. In Pro-ceedings of the 50th annual international symposium on computer architecture , pages 1–14, 2023. [28] Marco Kurzynski, Shaizeen Aga, and Di Wu. Lit sil-icon: A case where thermal imbalance couples con-current execution in multiple gpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09861 , 2025. [29] ChonLam Lao, Yanfang Le, Kshiteej Mahajan, Yixi Chen, Wenfei Wu, Aditya Akella, and Michael Swift. ATP: In-network aggregation for multi-tenant learning. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems De-sign and Implementation , pages 741–761, 2021. [30] ChonLam Lao, Minlan Yu, Aditya Akella, Jiamin Cao, Yu Guan, Pengcheng Zhang, Zhilong Zheng, Yichi Xu, Ennan Zhai, Dennis Cai, et al. Trainmover: An interruption-resilient and reliable ml training runtime. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12636 , 2024. [31] MR Leadbetter and Holger Rootzen. Extremal theory for stochastic processes. The Annals of Probability ,pages 431–478, 1988. [32] Seonho Lee, Jihwan Oh, Seokjin Go, and Divya Maha-jan. Characterizing compute-communication overlap in gpu-accelerated distributed deep learning: Performance and power implications. In 2025 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) , pages 353–355. IEEE, 2025. [33] Jiamin Li, Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Cong Wang, and Hong Xu. Accelerating distributed MoE training and inference with Lina. In 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 23) , pages 945–959, 2023. [34] Wanchao Liang, Tianyu Liu, Less Wright, Will Consta-ble, Andrew Gu, Chien-Chin Huang, Iris Zhang, Wei Feng, Howard Huang, Junjie Wang, et al. TorchTitan: One-stop PyTorch native solution for production ready LLM pretraining. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR) , volume 2025, pages 92161– 92181, 2025. [35] Jinkun Lin, Ziheng Jiang, Zuquan Song, Sida Zhao, Menghan Yu, Zhanghan Wang, Chenyuan Wang, Zuocheng Shi, Xiang Shi, Wei Jia, et al. Understanding stragglers in large model training using what-if analy-sis. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation , pages 483–498, 2025. [36] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 techni-cal report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024. [37] Xuting Liu, Behnaz Arzani, Siva Kesava Reddy Kakarla, Liangyu Zhao, Vincent Liu, Miguel Castro, Srikanth Kandula, and Luke Marshall. Rethinking machine learn-ing collective communication as a multi-commodity 14 flow problem. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 16–37, 2024. [38] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGresley, Mostofa Patwary, Vijay Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. Efficient large-scale language model training on GPU clusters using Megatron-LM. In 

Proceedings of the international conference for high per-formance computing, networking, storage and analysis ,pages 1–15, 2021. [39] NERSC. Perlmutter architecture. https://docs .nersc .gov/ systems/perlmutter/architecture/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-10. [40] NVIDIA. NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU Architec-ture. https://www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/a100/, 2020. Accessed: 2025-05-10. [41] NVIDIA. NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU. https: //www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/h100/, 2022. Ac-cessed: 2025-05-10. [42] NVIDIA. NVIDIA H200 Tensor Core GPU. https: //www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/h200/, 2023. Ac-cessed: 2025-05-10. [43] NVIDIA. NCCL Tests. https://github .com/NVIDIA/ nccl-tests, 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-10. [44] NVIDIA. NVIDIA B200 Tensor Core GPU. https: //www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/b200/, 2024. Ac-cessed: 2025-05-10. [45] NVIDIA. NVIDIA InfiniBand. https: //www .nvidia .com/en-us/networking/infiniband-adapters/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-10. [46] NVIDIA. NVIDIA Nsight Systems. https:// developer .nvidia .com/nsight-systems, 2025. Version used: 2025.3.1. [47] NVIDIA. NVIDIA NVLink and NVSwitch. https: //www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/nvlink/, 2025. Ac-cessed: 2025-05-10. [48] NVIDIA. NVIDIA RoCE (RDMA over Converged Ethernet). https://www .nvidia .com/en-us/networking/ roce/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-10. [49] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Nsight Compute .NVIDIA Corporation, 2026. [50] Suchita Pati, Shaizeen Aga, Mahzabeen Islam, Nuwan Jayasena, and Matthew D Sinclair. T3: Transparent tracking & triggering for fine-grained overlap of com-pute & collectives. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Vol-ume 2 , pages 1146–1164, 2024. [51] PyTorch Contributors. PyTorch Profiler. https:// pytorch .org/docs/stable/profiler .html, 2025. [52] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan, Binzhang Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, et al. Alibaba HPN: A data center network for large language model training. In Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 691–706, 2024. [53] Samyam Rajbhandari, Conglong Li, Zhewei Yao, Min-jia Zhang, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jeff Rasley, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed-MoE: Advancing mixture-of-experts inference and training to power next-generation AI scale. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 18332–18346. PMLR, 2022. [54] Saeed Rashidi, Matthew Denton, Srinivas Sridharan, Su-darshan Srinivasan, Amoghavarsha Suresh, Jade Nie, and Tushar Krishna. Enabling compute-communication overlap in distributed deep learning training platforms. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Sympo-sium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) , pages 540–553. IEEE, 2021. [55] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion pa-rameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD in-ternational conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 3505–3506, 2020. [56] Zhenghang Ren, Yuxuan Li, Zilong Wang, Xinyang Huang, Wenxue Li, Kaiqiang Xu, Xudong Liao, Yijun Sun, Bowen Liu, Han Tian, et al. Enabling efficient GPU communication over multiple NICs with FuseLink. In 

19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25) , pages 91–108, 2025. [57] Taylor Allison Rohil Bhargava and Harry Petty. NVIDIA Vera Rubin POD: Seven chips, five rack-scale systems, one AI supercomputer, March 2026. NVIDIA Technical Blog. [58] RunPod, Inc. AI infrastructure developers trust. https: //www .runpod .io/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-10. [59] Amedeo Sapio, Marco Canini, Chen-Yu Ho, Jacob Nelson, Panos Kalnis, Changhoon Kim, Arvind Kr-ishnamurthy, Masoud Moshref, Dan Ports, and Peter Richtárik. Scaling distributed machine learning with in-network aggregation. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 21) , pages 785–808, 2021. 15 [60] Aashaka Shah, Vijay Chidambaram, Meghan Cowan, Saeed Maleki, Madan Musuvathi, Todd Mytkowicz, Ja-cob Nelson, Olli Saarikivi, and Rachee Singh. TACCL: Guiding collective algorithm synthesis using communi-cation sketches. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Net-worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) ,pages 593–612, 2023. [61] Aashaka Shah, Abhinav Jangda, Binyang Li, Caio Rocha, Changho Hwang, Jithin Jose, Madan Musu-vathi, Olli Saarikivi, Peng Cheng, Qinghua Zhou, et al. MSCCL++: Rethinking GPU Communication Abstrac-tions for Cutting-edge AI Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09014 , 2025. [62] Siyuan Shen, Langwen Huang, Marcin Chrapek, Timo Schneider, Jai Dayal, Manisha Gajbe, Robert Wis-niewski, and Torsten Hoefler. LLAMP: Assessing net-work latency tolerance of HPC applications with linear programming. In SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–18. IEEE, 2024. [63] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catan-zaro. Megatron-LM: Training multi-billion parame-ter language models using model parallelism. CoRR ,abs/1909.08053, 2019. [64] Prasoon Sinha, Akhil Guliani, Rutwik Jain, Brandon Tran, Matthew D Sinclair, and Shivaram Venkataraman. Not all gpus are created equal: characterizing variability in large-scale, accelerator-rich systems. In SC22: Inter-national Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 01–15. IEEE, 2022. [65] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023. [66] Shibo Wang, Jinliang Wei, Amit Sabne, Andy Davis, Berkin Ilbeyi, Blake Hechtman, Dehao Chen, Karthik Srinivasa Murthy, Marcello Maggioni, Qiao Zhang, et al. Overlap communication with dependent computation via decomposition in large deep learning models. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 , pages 93–106, 2022. [67] Xizheng Wang, Qingxu Li, Yichi Xu, Gang Lu, Dan Li, Li Chen, Heyang Zhou, Linkang Zheng, Sen Zhang, Yikai Zhu, et al. SimAI: Unifying architecture design and performance tuning for Large-Scale large language model training with scalability and precision. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25) , pages 541–558, 2025. [68] Zhuang Wang, Zhaozhuo Xu, Jingyi Xi, Yuke Wang, Anshumali Shrivastava, and TS Eugene Ng. ZEN: Em-powering distributed training with sparsity-driven data synchronization. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Oper-ating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25) ,pages 537–556, 2025. [69] Ertza Warraich, Omer Shabtai, Khalid Manaa, Shay Var-gaftik, Yonatan Piasetzky, Matty Kadosh, Lalith Suresh, and Muhammad Shahbaz. OptiReduce: Resilient and tail-optimal allreduce for distributed deep learning in the cloud. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25) , pages 685–703, 2025. [70] Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David Patter-son. Roofline: an insightful visual performance model for multicore architectures. Communications of the ACM , 52(4):65–76, 2009. [71] William Won, Midhilesh Elavazhagan, Sudarshan Srini-vasan, Swati Gupta, and Tushar Krishna. TACOS: Topology-aware collective algorithm synthesizer for dis-tributed machine learning. In 2024 57th IEEE/ACM In-ternational Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,pages 856–870. IEEE, 2024. [72] William Won, Taekyung Heo, Saeed Rashidi, Srinivas Sridharan, Sudarshan Srinivasan, and Tushar Krishna. Astra-sim2.0: Modeling hierarchical networks and dis-aggregated systems for large-model training at scale. In 

2023 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) , pages 283– 294. IEEE, 2023. [73] Tianyuan Wu, Wei Wang, Yinghao Yu, Siran Yang, Wen-chao Wu, Qinkai Duan, Guodong Yang, Jiamang Wang, Lin Qu, and Liping Zhang. FALCON: Pinpointing and mitigating stragglers for large-scale hybrid-parallel train-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12588 , 2024. [74] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [75] Zhiyi Yao, Pengbo Hu, Congcong Miao, Xuya Jia, Zun-ing Liang, Yuedong Xu, Chunzhi He, Hao Lu, Mingzhuo Chen, Xiang Li, et al. Holmes: Localizing irregularities in LLM training with mega-scale GPU clusters. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25) , pages 523–540, 2025. 16 [76] Liangyu Zhao, Saeed Maleki, Yuanhong Wang, Zezhou Wang, Ziyue Yang, Hossein Pourreza, and Arvind Krish-namurthy. ForestColl: Throughput-Optimal collective communications on heterogeneous network fabrics. In 

23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation , pages 2067–2093, 2026. [77] Lianmin Zheng, Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhifeng Chen, Yanping Huang, Yida Wang, Yuanzhong Xu, Danyang Zhuo, Eric P Xing, et al. Alpa: Automating inter-and intra-operator parallelism for dis-tributed deep learning. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) , pages 559–578, 2022. [78] Pengfei Zuo, Huimin Lin, Junbo Deng, Nan Zou, Xingkun Yang, Yingyu Diao, Weifeng Gao, Ke Xu, Zhangyu Chen, Shirui Lu, et al. Serving Large Language Models on Huawei CloudMatrix384. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12708 , 2025. 

A FSDP results 0 20 40 60 80 100 % of Comm. Time Spent Waiting 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 CDF      

> Llama-3 70B
> A100 H100 H200 Fastest Median

Figure 14: CDFs of the synchronization tax—shown as the percent of NCCL collective communication time that the fastest and median ranks spend waiting—across FSDP collective instances for all work-loads and architectures. 

In addition to our CDF-based analysis of TP communica-tion overheads, we observe similar trends for FSDP commu-nication events when running Llama-3 70B across multiple GPU architectures. 

B Existing critical-path analysis tools 

While PyTorch offers an experimental trace analysis tool [3], it only takes in a single rank’s trace as input, requires adding extra CUDA synchronization events that distort runtime be-havior (our Llama-3 70B workload fails after 30 iterations when using it), and only infers the longest the path for the en-tire duration rather than μs granularity before each collective. Perftracker [20] also identifies a critical path. However, this method uses a pre-defined ranking of importance: the event with the highest priority is always selected as part of the critical path. This summarizes where time is spent but does not trace dependencies, and excludes concurrent opera-tions that do not align with the pre-defined ranking. Instead of tracing a sequence of dependent events, the method computes the fraction of time during which the highest-priority events are exposed. Perftracker guarantees that the constructed path accounts for the full duration of execution, but does not reveal dependency structures. By ignoring execution contexts such as streams and operation boundaries, Perftracker can intro-duce artificial transitions between unrelated events, implicitly suggesting dependencies that do not exist. 

C Critical-path analysis algorithms 

Algorithm 1 Traverse( G, node _id , start _id , C) 

> 1:

comp ← 0; path ← {} ; 

> 2:

while true do  

> 3:

v ← G.get (node _id ) 

> 4:

if (node _id ̸ = start _id ∧ node _id ∈ C) or node _id =

0 then  

> 5:

return comp , node _id , path  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

P ← G.parents (node _id ) 

> 8:

if P = /0 then  

> 9:

return comp , node _id , path  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

p∗ ← arg max p∈P p.te 

> 12:

ps ← same-stream parent in P if exists  

> 13:

if ps̸ = ⊥ ∧ | p∗.te − ps.te| < δ then  

> 14:

p∗ ← ps 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

if node _id ̸ = start _id then  

> 17:

comp += v.d; path [v.name ] += v.d 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

node _id ← p∗.id  

> 20:

end while Algorithm 2 AnalyzeGroup( group , comms , comps ,

ancs , paths ) 

> 1:

for each event j do  

> 2:

a∗ ← min r∈group ancs [r][ j] 

> 3:

for each r ∈ group do  

> 4:

comp [r] ← comps [r][ j] 

> 5:

comm [r] ← comms [r][ j] 

> 6:

dur [r] ← paths [r][ j] 

> 7:

k ← ancs [r][ j] 

> 8:

while k ≥ 0 and ancs [r][ k] > a∗ do  

> 9:

comp [r] += comps [r][ k] + comms [r][ k] 

> 10:

merge paths [r][ k] into dur [r] 

> 11:

k ← ancs [r][ k] 

> 12:

end while  

> 13:

if k ≥ 0 then  

> 14:

comp [r] += comps [r][ k] + comms [r][ k] 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

end for 

17 Algorithm 3 BuildDAG( timeline , comm _stream )

Input: timeline : map of stream → event list; comm _stream :communication stream name 

Output: G = ( V, E): execution DAG; C ⊆ V : communica-tion nodes  

> 1:

G ← ({r}, /0), r dummy root with id = 0 

> 2:

H ← /0 (min-heap on te); last _fin ← ⊥ ; last _strm [s] ←⊥ 

> 3:

C ← /0; tcomm ← 0; id ← 1; ptr [s] ← 0 for all s 

> 4:

Let active (s) ≡ ptr [s] < |timeline [s]| 

> 5:

while ∃ s : active (s) do  

> 6:

s∗ ← stream with earliest next event among all s with 

active (s) 

> 7:

e ← next event of s∗; ptr [s∗] += 1 

> 8:

while H̸ = /0 and H.min () .te ≤ e.ts do  

> 9:

last _fin ← H.pop () .id  

> 10:

end while  

> 11:

v ← new GPU node (id , e); 

> 12:

G.V ← G.V ∪ { v} 

> 13:

p ← last _fin if last _fin ̸ = ⊥ else r.id  

> 14:

G.E ← G.E ∪ { (p, id )} 

> 15:

if last _strm [s∗]̸ = ⊥ then  

> 16:

G.E ← G.E ∪ { (last _strm [s∗], id )} 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

last _strm [s∗] ← id ; H.push (v) 

> 19:

if s∗ = comm _stream then  

> 20:

C ← C ∪ { id }; 

> 21:

tcomm ← max (tcomm , e.te) 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

if e.corr ∈ timeline [driver ] then  

> 24:

ℓ ← new CPU node (id +1, cudaLaunchKernel ) 

> 25:

G.V ← G.V ∪ { ℓ}; 

> 26:

G.E ← G.E ∪ { (ℓ. id , id )} 

> 27:

id ← id + 1 

> 28:

end if  

> 29:

id ← id + 1 

> 30:

end while  

> 31:

return (G, C)

D Compute blocks 

We provide an example of compute blocks by enumerating the index-to-compute-block mapping for the Llama-3 70B workload below. Each compute block is an order sequence of GEMM kernels that executes between consecutive collectives, as referenced in Figure 11. We have appended the M, K, and 

N GEMM kernel dimensions to the end of each kernel name.            

> 0:
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopB_TNN_16384_7168_8192
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopB_TNN_16384_8192_7168
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopB_TNN_16384_8192_7168
> 1:
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x3_2x1_v_bz_coopB_NNN_16384_7168_8192
> •nvjet_tst_128x256_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopA_NTN_7168_16384_8192
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x3_2x1_v_bz_coopB_NNN_16384_7168_8192
> •nvjet_tst_128x256_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopA_NTN_7168_16384_8192
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x3_2x1_v_bz_coopB_NNN_16384_8192_7168
> •nvjet_tst_128x256_64x4_2x1_v_bz_coopA_NTN_8192_16384_7168
> 2:
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x3_2x1_v_bz_coopB_NNN_16384_32064_8192
> •nvjet_tst_192x192_64x3_1x2_h_bz_coopB_NTN_32064_16384_8192

E Best-fitting GEV distribution 

We also fit the GEV distribution using MLE with scipy ,allowing all three parameters to be free (including the shape, 

ξ). Figure 15 shows the best-fitting GEV distribution to the 

z-scores of per-instance GEMM kernel maxima across all workloads. The best-fitting distribution has a shape parameter of ξ = 0.14, which falls into the heavy-tailed Frechet domain (ξ > 0). Even the fitted distribution shown in Figure 15 may understate the synchronization tax, as empirical quantiles fall above theoretical quantiles, suggesting heavy-tailed behavior. The expected value of the GEV distribution is 

E[X] = μ + σ · Γ(1 − ξ) − 1

ξ , ξ̸ = 0, ξ < 1where Γ(·) is the gamma function. When ξ ≥ 1, the expected value is undefined due to a severely heavy tail. By max-stability, the maximum of k i.i.d. samples from GEV (μ, σ, ξ)

is distributed as GEV (μ + σ kξ−1 

> ξ

, σkξ, ξ) [6]. Thus, the ex-pected maximum in a cluster of size n = km is 

E[Mn] = μ + σξ



kξ Γ(1 − ξ) − 1



. (10) Unlike the logarithmic growth with Gumbel (Eq. 3), the ex-pected maximum here grows as kξ, i.e., polynomially in clus-ter size, implying an even faster-growing synchronization tax. 

Figure 15: Best-fitting GEV distribution for z-scores of the maxima of cross-rank compute-block execution times ( zc, j in Eq. 4) across all hardware architectures and workloads. 

Using an identical approach as in §5.3, we evaluate how well the best-fitting GEV distribution captures the synchro-nization tax experienced at the ensuing collective in Figure 16. We also provide scatterplots of our model validation for both the Gumbel and best-fitting (Frechet) distributions in Figures 17 and 18, respectively. The points falling along y=x

line indicate that our analytical model of cross-rank variation in compute block execution can accurately predict the mean observed synchronization delay during the collective. 18 0 1 2                                            

> Unique compute block
> 02000 4000 6000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (a) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, A100
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 01000 2000 3000 4000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (b) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H100
> 0123
> Unique compute block
> 01000 2000 3000
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (c) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H200
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 0200 400 600
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (d) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, A100
> 01
> Unique compute block
> 0100 200 300
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (e) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H100
> 012
> Unique compute block
> 0200 400 600
> Sync  delay  (μs)  (f) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H200 Mean empirical ±SEM Predicted

Figure 16: Validation of the best-fitting GEV distribution. For each unique compute block (x-axis), we compare the predicted expected delay—–derived from the fitted Gumbel distribution and z-score conversion—to the empirically observed mean synchronization delay across all collectives following the given compute block. 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 02000 4000 6000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (a) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, A100 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 01000 2000 3000 4000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (b) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H100 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 01000 2000 3000 4000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (c) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H200 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0200 400 600 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (d) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, A100 0 100 200 300 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0100 200 300 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (e) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H100 0 200 400 600 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0200 400 600 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (f) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H200 y = x Mean empirical ± SEM 

Figure 17: Scatterplot of our validation of the Gumbel distribution. 

F Calculating the z-score 

We provide the mathematical formulas for the variables used in Eq. 4 below. In statistics, the pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the combined standard deviation of inde-pendent groups from the same population. In our case, the population is all execution times of compute block c, and each independent group is a unique instance j of that com-pute block. sc, j is the standard deviation across m ranks of instance j of compute-block c.

Mc, j = max 

i Xc, j,i, ¯Xc, j = 1

m

m

# ∑

i=1

Xc, j,i,

sc,pooled =

s

∑ j(m − 1) s2

c, j

∑ j(m − 1) ,

(11) 

G Additional bandwidth scaling results 

In addition to Figure 12, which shows the optimal bandwidth requirement B∗ to satisfy εB elasticity as n increases using the Gumbel-fitted model for the Llama-3 70B workload (BF16) on H200s, we also provide results for other workloads and the best-fitting model here. Figure 19 shows this scaling trend for the same workload using the best-fitting (Frechet domain) GEV distribution while Figures 20 and 21 show it for the Qwen-3 32B workload on H200s with the Gumbel and best-fitting distributions, respectively. 19 0 2000 4000 6000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 02000 4000 6000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (a) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, A100 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 01000 2000 3000 4000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (b) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H100 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Predicted mean delay (μs) 01000 2000 3000 4000 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (c) Qwen-3 32B, TP=8, H200 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0200 400 600 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (d) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, A100 0 100 200 300 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0100 200 300 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (e) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H100 0 200 400 600 Predicted mean delay (μs) 0200 400 600 Mean  empirical  delay  (μs)  (f) Llama-3 70B, TP=4 x FSDP=2, H200 y = x Mean empirical ± SEM Figure 18: Scatterplot of our validation of the best-fitting GEV distribution. 10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(a) Ring 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(b) 3D Torus 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(c) Ideal Fully Connected 

Baseline, =-0.1 w/ sync tax, =-0.1 Baseline, =-0.5 w/ sync tax, =-0.5 NVLink (450 GB/s) 

Figure 19: Optimal link bandwidth B∗ across common scale-up topologies as cluster size increases (best-fit GEV, Llama 70B). 10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(a) Ring 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

10 6

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(b) 3D Torus 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

10 6

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(c) Ideal Fully Connected 

Baseline, =-0.1 w/ sync tax, =-0.1 Baseline, =-0.5 w/ sync tax, =-0.5 NVLink (450 GB/s) 

Figure 20: Optimal link bandwidth B∗ across common scale-up topologies as cluster size increases (Gumbel, Qwen 32B). 10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(a) Ring 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

10 6

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(b) 3D Torus 

10 1 10 2 10 3

N (# GPUs) 

10 3

10 4

10 5

10 6

> Optimal  bandwidth  (GB/s)

(c) Ideal Fully Connected 

Baseline, =-0.1 w/ sync tax, =-0.1 Baseline, =-0.5 w/ sync tax, =-0.5 NVLink (450 GB/s) 

Figure 21: Optimal link bandwidth B∗ across common scale-up topologies as cluster size increases (best-fit GEV, Qwen 32B). 

20