Title: DART-FL: Burst-Aware Multitask Federated Learning under Dynamic Inference Demand at the Edge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27713v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 00:15:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# DART-FL: Burst-Aware Multitask Federated Learning under Dynamic Inference Demand at the Edge 

Yiming Xie 1, Pinrui Yu 1, Geng Yuan 2, Xue Lin 1, Ningfang Mi 1

> 1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 

> 2

School of Computing, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA 

Email: 1{xie.yimi, yu.pin, xue.lin, n.mi }@northeastern.edu, 2geng.yuan@uga.edu 

Abstract —Edge intelligence systems increasingly require model training and online inference to coexist on resource-constrained devices, while inference demand can vary substantially across tasks over time. This creates two coupled challenges: sufficient computation must be reserved for inference to maintain service-level objectives (SLOs), while the remaining training capacity should adapt to task-specific demand so that frequently requested tasks can improve earlier during training. We propose an SLO-aware, demand-driven multitask feder-ated learning framework (DART-FL) that jointly adapts the inference–training resource split and task-level training emphasis. At each scheduling interval, DART-FL uses the inference backlog and profiled service capacity to determine the minimum re-source allocation required for inference. The remaining training capacity is then distributed across tasks using a queue-aware DPP-inspired scheduler, and the resulting task allocations are mapped to dynamic loss weights. This allows tasks experiencing higher inference demand to receive greater training emphasis in earlier communication rounds. Clients train a shared backbone with task-specific heads, and the complete multitask model is aggregated through FedAvg. We evaluate DART-FL using Stanford Cars and Oxford Flowers 102 under both synthetic and real Alibaba trace-derived workloads. Results show that DART-FL dynamically adapts the inference-training resource split to time-varying inference demand and shifts the learning progress of high-demand tasks toward their burst periods, improving model accuracy when those tasks are frequently requested while maintaining comparable long-term multitask performance. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Edge devices are increasingly required to support both continuous model training and real-time inference services. Applications such as autonomous driving, mobile vision assis-tants, and on-device language understanding rely on models that must continuously adapt to newly collected data while simultaneously serving user requests [1], [2]. In such sys-tems, computation resources are shared between training and inference, creating a fundamental tension: allocating more resources to inference reduces the capacity available for model improvement, whereas aggressive training may increase inference latency and lead to service-level objective (SLO) violations [2]. This challenge becomes more significant in multitask edge applications. For example, an autonomous vehicle may simul-taneously support object recognition, scene understanding, and traffic-related perception tasks. Similarly, mobile and embed-ded devices increasingly execute multiple vision or language services using a shared backbone with task-specific prediction heads. Such architectures enable parameter sharing and joint learning across related tasks, while the relative weighting of task objectives can substantially affect multitask optimization [3], [4]. In practice, inference demand can also be highly bursty [5]. A sudden increase in requests for one task can rapidly build up its inference queue, requiring additional computation resources to maintain the target SLO. Meanwhile, the remaining training resources must be distributed across multiple tasks. Treating all tasks uniformly under such workload changes can be inefficient: resources may continue to be allocated to tasks with low current inference demand while a highly requested task receives insufficient training resources. Therefore, a joint scheduling mechanism should address two coupled decisions: 

how much computation should be reserved for inference to satisfy the SLO, and how should the remaining training capacity be distributed among tasks according to their current demand? 

Several recent works have investigated the coexistence of training and inference on resource-constrained edge platforms. EdgeOL, for example, studies efficient in-situ online learning on edge devices under limited resources [1]. Other stud-ies consider federated learning systems that simultaneously provide model inference services and optimize training and inference resource allocation across distributed clients [2]. These studies demonstrate the importance of coordinating learning and serving workloads. However, existing approaches primarily focus on resource allocation, participation, or model-update decisions, and do not explicitly connect bursty task-specific inference demand with the allocation of training effort across multiple tasks. In this paper, we study a multitask federated learning system in which online inference and local training share limited com-putation resources. Our key insight is that inference demand should influence not only the amount of computation allocated to inference, but also how the remaining capacity is distributed across training tasks. A burst in task-specific inference requests should therefore trigger two coordinated responses: sufficient resources should first be reserved for inference to control service delay and maintain SLOs, while the remaining training capacity should temporarily prioritize the high-demand task. By advancing the training progress of the high-demand task, the system can improve its model accuracy when that task is actively serving inference requests, while maintaining similar arXiv:2608.27713v1 [cs.LG] 27 Aug 2026 overall accuracy after training converges. To realize this idea, we propose an SLO-aware joint infer-ence and training framework , DART-FL, with queue-aware scheduling inspired by Drift-Plus-Penalty (DPP) control [6]. The framework operates in two stages. First, an SLO-aware resource allocator uses the current inference backlog and pro-filed device service capacity to determine the minimum ratio of computation resources required for inference, leaving the remaining capacity for local training. Second, a queue-aware DPP-inspired scheduler uses task-specific pre-service queues as demand signals and dynamically distributes the available training capacity among tasks. The resulting allocation is then mapped to adaptive task loss weights, therefore coupling real-time inference demand with local multitask optimization. This design provides a closed-loop interaction between inference serving and federated training. When inference de-mand increases, the system automatically reserves additional resources for request processing; when the demand becomes concentrated on particular tasks, their growing queue states increase their training priority. As demand changes over time, the scheduler dynamically adapts both the inference-training resource split and the task-level training allocation, while preserving shared representation learning through the multitask model. We further analyze the proposed framework theoretically. Specifically, we characterize the minimum infer-ence resource allocation required to satisfy the SLO, establish inference queue stability under a supportable workload, ana-lyze the properties of the queue-aware training allocation, and characterize the convergence behavior of federated multitask training under dynamic task weights. We evaluate the proposed framework using a multitask vision workload consisting of Stanford Cars [7] and Oxford Flowers 102 [8] with a shared ResNet backbone and task-specific heads. The experiments emulate time-varying and bursty task-specific inference arrivals while federated training proceeds concurrently. The results demonstrate that DART-FL dynamically adapts the inference-training resource split to workload changes and reallocates training capacity toward high-demand tasks, improving model accuracy for actively requested tasks while maintaining overall multitask learning performance. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:  

> •

We formulate the coexistence of online inference and multitask federated training as a joint scheduling problem under time-varying and bursty task-specific inference demand.  

> •

We develop an SLO-aware resource allocation mecha-nism that uses inference queue states and profiled service capacity to determine the inference-training computation split while preserving the maximum feasible capacity for local training.  

> •

We design a queue-aware DPP-inspired training scheduler that distributes the remaining training capacity across tasks according to task-specific inference demand and translates the resulting allocation into dynamic multitask loss weights.  

> •

We provide theoretical analysis of SLO-aware resource allocation, inference queue stability, and federated multi-task convergence under dynamic task weights, and eval-uate the framework on a multitask federated learning testbed under bursty inference workloads. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Federated Multitask Learning 

Federated learning (FL) enables distributed clients to col-laboratively train models while keeping raw data local. Fe-dAvg established the standard framework in which clients perform local optimization and the server aggregates their model updates into a global model [9]. Subsequent studies have extended FL to heterogeneous edge environments and multiple learning tasks. Federated multitask learning (FMTL) considers scenarios in which multiple related tasks are learned collaboratively while exploiting shared representations or cross-task knowledge. Existing studies have investigated multitask learning under communication and computation constraints. Ma et al. develop dynamic user and task scheduling for FMTL over wireless networks [10], while Zhuang et al. propose MAS to efficiently coordinate multiple simultaneous federated learning tasks [11]. These approaches primarily coordinate multitask training according to training dynamics or system resource constraints. In contrast, our work considers a different source of task heterogeneity: time-varying inference demand . We use online task-specific inference demand to determine when each task should receive greater training emphasis. Consequently, a task experiencing high inference demand can receive more training attention in earlier rounds, advancing its learning progress and improving model accuracy when the task is actively requested, without necessarily changing the final converged accuracy. 

B. Joint Training and Inference on Edge Devices 

Training and inference increasingly coexist on resource-constrained edge platforms. Unlike the conventional train-then-deploy paradigm, continuously learning systems must update their models while simultaneously serving online infer-ence requests. Since the two workloads compete for the same computation resources, increasing training activity may reduce inference service capacity, whereas prioritizing inference can slow model improvement. Recent studies have investigated this training-inference coupling. For example, EdgeOL develops an in-situ online learning framework for continuously adapting models on resource-constrained edge devices while maintaining inference performance [1]. Han et al. study federated learning while providing model-as-a-service and jointly optimize learning participation, inference service, and computation and com-munication resource allocation [2]. These studies demonstrate the importance of coordinating model learning with online inference services. Our work differs from prior approaches in two impor-tant aspects. First, we consider a multitask model in which inference requests are associated with different tasks and may exhibit distinct, time-varying demand patterns. Second, inference demand affects not only the computation allocation between inference and training, but also how the remain-ing training capacity is distributed across tasks. Specifically, the aggregate inference backlog determines the SLO-aware inference-training resource split, while task-specific queue states determine the relative training emphasis among tasks. This two-level scheduling mechanism establishes a direct connection between online inference demand and the temporal progression of multitask federated training. 

C. Queue-Aware Online Resource and Task Scheduling 

Queue-aware scheduling has been extensively studied for online resource allocation in communication and computing systems. Lyapunov optimization [6] provides a general frame-work for making online decisions under stochastic arrivals without requiring prior knowledge of future workloads. In particular, Drift-Plus-Penalty (DPP) methods balance queue stability against application-specific performance objectives and have been widely used for dynamic resource allocation [6]. These principles are particularly relevant to bursty work-loads because queue states provide an online measure of ac-cumulated demand. A growing queue indicates that the current service or resource allocation is insufficient relative to recent arrivals, allowing an online scheduler to adapt without pre-dicting future requests. Existing queue-aware approaches [12], [13], [14], however, generally use queue information to control resources that directly serve the corresponding workload, such as computation, communication, or service capacity. Our framework uses queue information in two complemen-tary roles. First, the aggregate pre-service inference backlog is used to determine the minimum inference resource ratio required to meet the target SLO. Second, the task-specific pre-service queues serve as demand signals for a DPP-inspired training scheduler. Rather than directly allocating training resources to serve these queues, the scheduler uses them to determine the optimal distribution of the available training capacity across tasks, which is subsequently mapped to dy-namic multitask training weights. Hence, inference demand influences both how much computation remains available for training and which tasks receive greater training emphasis. 

D. Summary and Distinction 

Existing FMTL studies primarily schedule training based on learning dynamics or system resource conditions, while joint training-inference systems primarily determine how resources should be divided between learning and serving workloads. In contrast, our framework connects these two decisions through online, task-specific inference demand. Specifically, bursty in-ference demand first adjusts the SLO-aware inference-training resource split and then determines the relative training priority of individual tasks. This allows the learning progress of a high-demand task to be advanced to earlier communication rounds, enabling the model to provide higher accuracy during periods when that task is frequently requested, while preserving the long-term performance of the multitask model. III. SLO-A WARE JOINT INFERENCE AND TRAINING 

FRAMEWORK 

We consider a federated multitask learning system in which online inference and local model training coexist on resource-constrained edge clients. Since these workloads share the same computation resources, increasing the resources allocated to inference reduces those available for model training, and vice versa. To address this coupling, we develop an SLO-aware, demand-driven multitask federated learning framework (DART-FL). Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of DART-FL, which consists of four main stages: bursty multi-task inference demand, SLO-aware inference-training resource allocation, queue-aware training scheduling, and federated multitask learning. Specifically, at each scheduling interval, newly arrived in-ference requests are first incorporated into task-specific pre-service queues. A shared scheduler then determines the mini-mum inference resource ratio required to satisfy a predefined SLO and assigns the remaining computation capacity to lo-cal training. The available training capacity is subsequently distributed among learning tasks according to their current inference demand. The resulting task allocations are mapped to dynamic task weights, which determine the relative contri-bution of each task to the local multitask training objective. 

A. System Model and Queue Dynamics 

Consider one parameter server and a set of edge clients 

C = {1, . . . , C }. Each client c ∈ C maintains a private local dataset Dc and participates in training a common set of tasks 

T = {1, . . . , T }. Raw training samples remain on the clients, while model parameters are exchanged with the server during federated aggregation. Each client maintains the same multitask model architec-ture Θ = {Θb, Θ1, . . . , ΘT }, where Θb denotes the shared feature extractor and Θτ denotes the task-specific prediction head for task τ . For an input x, task τ produces fτ (x) = 

hτ (g(x; Θ b), Θτ ).

Shared inference workload. We model inference demand at the system level because the scheduler makes one shared resource-allocation decision for each scheduling interval t. Let 

Aτ (t) denote the number of newly arrived inference requests for task τ during interval t, and let Qτ (t) denote the backlog carried from the previous interval. Since the current arrivals should immediately influence the scheduling decision, we define the pre-service queue as 

eQτ (t) = Qτ (t) + Aτ (t). (1) Then, the aggregate pre-service backlog is eQ(t) =P  

> τ∈T

eQτ (t).Fig. 1: Overview of DART-FL for federated multitask learning. Bursty task-specific inference arrivals are incorporated into pre-service queues. The SLO-aware resource allocator first determines the inference resource ratio and assigns the remaining computation capacity to training. The shared queue-aware scheduler then distributes the available training capacity across tasks according to their current inference demand, and the resulting allocation determines the dynamic task weights used by selected clients for local multitask training. Finally, full-model FedAvg aggregates the shared backbone and all task-specific heads. Let Sτ (t) denote the number of inference requests of task 

τ served during interval t. After service, the queue evolves according to 

Qτ (t + 1) = 

h eQτ (t) − Sτ (t)

i+

, (2) where [x]+ ≜ max {x, 0}.This arrival-first queue convention allows both the SLO-aware resource allocator and the training scheduler to react to inference bursts within the same scheduling interval. 

Computation resources. Let eϕ denote the maximum in-stantaneous computation capacity available to the shared inference-training scheduler, and let γ(t) ∈ [0 , 1] denote the fraction assigned to inference. Accordingly, ϕinf (t) = γ(t) eϕ

and ϕtr (t) = (1 − γ(t)) eϕ, where ϕinf and ϕtr are the computation resources allocated to inference and training, respectively. Let μmax denote the maximum inference throughput under full inference allocation, obtained through offline hardware profiling in requests per second. Assuming that the effective service capability approximately scales with the allocated computation ratio, the inference service rate is 

μinf (t) = γ(t)μmax . (3) 

B. SLO-Aware Inference–Training Resource Allocation 

We next determine the shared computation ratio assigned to inference and training. Motivated by Little’s Law [15], the time required to clear the current pre-service backlog under the allocated inference capacity as 

D(t) = eQ(t)

μinf (t) = eQ(t)

γ(t)μmax . (4) Let DSLO denote the maximum acceptable inference delay. The condition D(t) ≤ DSLO requires 

γ(t) ≥ eQ(t)

DSLO μmax . (5) We therefore define the workload-dependent required infer-ence ratio as 

γreq (t) = eQ(t)

DSLO μmax . (6) The scheduler assigns only the inference resources required by the current workload while preserving the remaining com-putation for local training. 

γ∗(t) = 

" eQ(t)

DSLO μmax 

#γmax 

> γmin

, (7) where [x]ba ≜ min {b, max {a, x }} .Equivalently, using the maximum full-resource service ca-pacity M max = Tsμmax during a scheduling interval of duration Ts, we have: 

γreq (t) = eQ(t)Ts

DSLO M max . (8) The two forms are identical; μmax is measured in requests per second, whereas M max is measured in requests per scheduling interval. If γreq (t) > γ max , the workload exceeds the maximum inference allocation permitted by the resource constraint. The scheduler therefore saturates at γmax , and the target SLO is temporarily infeasible. The remaining training ratio is γtr (t) = 1 − γ∗(t). Let 

μtr ,max denote the maximum effective training capacity when all available computation is assigned to training. The training capacity available after the inference decision is therefore 

μtr (t) =  1 − γ∗(t)μtr ,max . (9) Thus, the first-stage decision determines the total amount of computation available for training, while the second-stage scheduler determines how this capacity is distributed among tasks. 

C. Queue-Aware Training Scheduling 

Now, we determine how the available training capacity 

μtr (t) is distributed among the tasks. Let ατ (t) denote the fraction of the available training capacity assigned to task τ , subject to P  

> τ∈T

ατ (t) = 1

and αmin ≤ ατ (t) ≤ αmax . The effective task-level training allocation is therefore 

μtr  

> τ

(t) = μtr (t)ατ (t). (10) Notice that γ(t) and ατ (t) represent two distinct scheduling decisions. The first-stage variable γ(t) divides the shared computation capacity between inference and training, whereas the second-stage variable ατ (t) distributes only the remaining training capacity among tasks. 

Queue-aware training utility. To prioritize tasks experi-encing higher inference demand, we define 

P (t) = X 

> τ∈T

eQτ (t) log  μtr (t)ατ (t) + ϵ0

 , (11) where ϵ0 > 0 avoids the logarithmic singularity. A larger 

eQτ (t) increases the scheduling importance of task τ , whereas the logarithmic utility introduces diminishing returns and discourages a single task from monopolizing the available training capacity. 

Temporal regularization. Responding directly to instan-taneous demand can cause large allocation changes across consecutive scheduling intervals. We therefore introduce the switching cost 

G(t) = ζ X 

> τ∈T

 ατ (t) − ατ (t − 1) 2, (12) where ζ > 0 controls the intrinsic scale of temporal regular-ization. Inspired by the Drift-Plus-Penalty (DPP) principle [6], we balance the workload-dependent training utility against tem-poral allocation changes. The shared scheduler solves 

α∗(t) = arg min  

> α(t)

V ζ X 

> τ∈T

 ατ (t) − ατ (t − 1) 2

− X 

> τ∈T

eQτ (t) log  μtr (t)ατ (t) + ϵ0



s.t. X 

> τ∈T

ατ (t) = 1 ,αmin ≤ ατ (t) ≤ αmax , ∀τ. (13) The queue-dependent term makes the scheduler responsive to the current inference workload. In particular, increasing 

eQτ (t) strengthens the incentive to allocate training capacity to task τ . In contrast, the switching term discourages large changes from the previous allocation. Therefore, the scheduler changes the training distribution only when the workload-dependent utility gain is sufficient to compensate for the temporal regularization cost. The parameters V and ζ have distinct roles. The coefficient 

ζ sets the numerical scale of the switching cost, whereas 

V > 0 controls the responsiveness–smoothness tradeoff. A smaller V allows the allocation to respond more aggressively to current inference demand, while a larger V favors smoother allocations across consecutive intervals. We emphasize that the inference queues are not directly served by ατ (t). Instead, they provide workload-state informa-tion for the training scheduler. Hence, (13) is a DPP-inspired queue-aware training allocation objective rather than the exact minimizer of the inference queue’s Lyapunov drift. 

D. Dynamic Multitask Training and Federated Aggregation 

The shared task allocation is incorporated into local multi-task training through dynamic task weights. Let w0 > 0 denote the base task weight and let β ≥ 0 control the strength of demand-aware prioritization. For task τ , we define 

wτ (t) = w0

 1 + βα ∗ 

> τ

(t), (14) where wτ (t) denotes the dynamic training weight assigned to task τ at scheduling interval t, and ατ (t)∗ is the optimal train-ing emphasis determined by the shared queue-aware scheduler. A larger wτ (t) increases the contribution of task τ to the local multitask training objective, thereby directing more training emphasis toward tasks with higher current demand. The normalized task weight is defined as: 

ωτ (t) = wτ (t)

P 

> j∈T

wj (t) . (15) Here, ωτ (t) represents the normalized training importance of task τ relative to all tasks, satisfying ωτ (t) ≥ 0

and P  

> τ∈T

ωτ (t) = 1. These normalized training weights 

{ωτ (t)}τ ∈T are then used by all clients selected for the corresponding federated round. Consequently, inference de-mand changes the relative training emphasis of the federation without requiring independent per-client scheduling states. Let Lc,τ (Θ) denote the task-specific training loss at client 

c. The local multitask objective is 

Lc(Θ; t) = X 

> τ∈T

ωτ (t)Lc,τ (Θ) . (16) Client c performs local optimization using the scheduler-weighted multitask objective. For SGD, a local update can be written as 

Θc ← Θc − η∇Lc(Θ c; t), (17) where η > 0 is the model learning rate and is unrelated to the scheduler regularization coefficient ζ.After local training, each client uploads its complete multi-task model, including the shared backbone and all task-specific heads. Let Sr denote the clients selected in communication round r. The server performs full-model FedAvg: 

Θr+1 = X

> c∈S r

Nc

P 

> k∈S r

Nk

Θr+1  

> c

, (18) where Nc denotes the number of local training samples at client c. Thus, both the shared backbone and all task-specific heads are aggregated into one global multitask model. 

E. Overall Scheduling and Federated Training Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall workflow of the pro-posed framework. At each scheduling interval, the shared scheduler first incorporates newly arrived inference requests into the task-specific pre-service queues. It then computes the SLO-aware inference allocation γ∗(t) and determines the remaining training capacity. Based on the task-specific pre-service queues, the scheduler solves the queue-aware train-ing allocation problem to obtain α∗(t) and converts the resulting task allocations into dynamic task weights. The same scheduler-generated weights are then used by all clients selected in the corresponding federated round. After local multitask optimization, the server performs full-model FedAvg over the shared backbone and all task-specific heads. IV. T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS 

We analyze the proposed framework from four aspects: SLO-aware inference allocation, inference-queue stability, queue-aware training emphasis, and federated multitask con-vergence under dynamic task weights. 

A. Minimum SLO-Aware Resource Allocation 

Given the aggregate pre-service backlog eQ(t) = P 

> τ

eQτ (t),we define the backlog-clearing delay surrogate as 

D(t) = eQ(t)

γ(t)μmax . (19) This is the time required to serve the current backlog under the allocated capacity assuming no new arrivals, rather than a per-request latency guarantee. 

Algorithm 1: Shared SLO-Aware Multitask FL Sched-uler 

Input: Global model Θ0, task set T , client set C

Initialize Qτ (0) = 0 and feasible ατ (0) ;

for r = 0 , . . . , R − 1 do 

Set t ← r;

Queue update: observe Aτ (t) and compute 

eQτ (t) = Qτ (t) + Aτ (t), ∀τ ∈ T ;

Resource allocation: compute the SLO-aware inference ratio γ∗(t) using (7) and obtain μtr (t);Serve inference requests and update 

Qτ (t + 1) = [ eQτ (t) − Sτ (t)] +;

Training allocation: solve (13) to obtain α∗(t);Compute and normalize the dynamic task weights 

{ωτ (t)}τ ∈T ;Select participating clients Sr and broadcast Θr

and {ωτ (t)};

foreach c ∈ S r in parallel do 

Train Θrc using the weighted multitask objective in (16); Aggregate the complete multitask models using full-model FedAvg in (18) to obtain Θr+1 ;Requiring D(t) ≤ DSLO implies 

γ(t) ≥ γreq (t) ≜ eQ(t)

DSLO μmax . (20) 

Theorem 1. The SLO-aware allocation 

γ∗(t) = min {γmax , max {γmin , γ req (t)}} (21) 

uses the minimum feasible inference resource required to meet the backlog-clearing delay target whenever feasible, thereby maximizing the remaining computation capacity for training. Proof. From (20), any feasible allocation satisfies γ(t) ≥

γreq (t). Since the remaining training ratio is 1−γ(t), selecting the smallest feasible γ(t) subject to γmin ≤ γ(t) ≤ γmax 

yields (21). If γreq (t) > γ max , the target is infeasible and the scheduler saturates at γmax .

B. Inference Queue Stability 

Let Q(t) = P 

> τ

Qτ (t) and A(t) = P 

> τ

Aτ (t), such that 

eQ(t) = Q(t) + A(t). Given inference allocation γ(t) and scheduling interval length Ts, the actual service is 

S(t) = min 

n eQ(t), γ (t)μmax Ts

o

. (22) Hence, 

Q(t + 1) = [ Q(t) + A(t) − S(t)] +. (23) Let Smax = γmax μmax Ts denote the maximum service capacity per interval. We assume 

E[A2(t) | Q(t)] ≤ A2 < ∞, 0 ≤ S(t) ≤ Smax ,

and a supportable workload such that, for some ϵ > 0,

E[A(t) | Q(t)] ≤ Smax − ϵ. (24) Using the quadratic Lyapunov function L(Q(t)) = 12 Q2(t),the standard drift argument [6] gives 

∆( t) ≤ B + Q(t)E[A(t) − S(t) | Q(t)] , (25) where B = 12 (A2 + S2max ) < ∞.

Theorem 2. Under the above assumptions, the aggregate inference queue under the SLO-aware allocation is strongly stable. Proof. Define 

Q0 = max {γmax DSLO μmax , S max } .

Since eQ(t) = Q(t) + A(t) ≥ Q(t), whenever Q(t) ≥ Q0,we have γreq (t) ≥ γmax and hence γ∗(t) = γmax . Moreover, 

eQ(t) ≥ Smax , so (22) gives S(t) = Smax . Therefore, 

E[A(t) − S(t) | Q(t)] ≤ − ϵ, Q(t) ≥ Q0.

Substituting into (25) yields 

∆( t) ≤ B − ϵQ (t)

outside the bounded region Q(t) < Q 0. The drift within this bounded region is finite and can be absorbed into a finite constant. By the standard Lyapunov stability criterion [6], 

lim sup 

> R→∞

1

R

> R−1

X

> t=0

E[Q(t)] < ∞. (26) Thus, temporary bursts may exceed the backlog-clearing delay target, while long-term queue stability is preserved whenever the workload is supportable. 

C. Queue-Aware Training Emphasis 

We next analyze the DPP-inspired queue-aware training em-phasis problem (13), where inference queues provide demand signals and ατ (t) represents relative training emphasis rather than physical GPU allocation. Suppressing the time index, the objective is 

f (α) = V ζ X

> τ

(ατ −αprev  

> τ

)2 −X

> τ

eQτ log( μtr ατ +ϵ0). (27) 

Theorem 3. For V > 0, ζ > 0, and ϵ0 > 0, if the simplex and box constraints define a nonempty feasible region, the training-emphasis problem is strongly convex and admits a unique global optimum α∗(t).Proof. The Hessian is diagonal, with 

∂2f∂α 2

> τ

= 2 V ζ + eQτ (μtr )2

(μtr ατ + ϵ0)2 ≥ 2V ζ > 0. (28) Hence, the objective is strongly convex, implying a unique global optimum over the convex feasible set. Moreover, 

∂f ∂α τ

= 2 V ζ (ατ − αprev  

> τ

) − eQτ μtr 

μtr ατ + ϵ0

. (29) A larger eQτ therefore strengthens the incentive to in-crease the training emphasis of task τ , while the quadratic term suppresses abrupt changes. Hence, V ζ controls the responsiveness–smoothness tradeoff. Equation (13) is DPP-inspired rather than the exact min-imizer of the inference queue’s Lyapunov drift: the queues provide demand signals for training, whereas inference service is controlled by γ(t).

D. Federated Multitask Convergence 

The optimal training emphasis is mapped to a normalized task weight as 

ωrτ = 1 + βα ∗,r τ

|T | + β , X 

> τ∈T

ωrτ = 1 , (30) where β ≥ 0 controls the strength of demand-aware task prioritization. Since α∗,r τ ≥ 0,

ωrτ ≥ 1

|T | + β > 0. (31) Thus, every task retains a nonzero contribution to the local training objective. When β = 0, all tasks receive equal weights, whereas increasing β makes the task weights more responsive to the scheduler output α∗,r τ .The local and global round-dependent objectives are 

F rc (Θ) = X

> τ

ωrτ Fc,τ (Θ) , F r (Θ) = X

> c

pcF rc (Θ) , (32) where pc = Nc/ P 

> j

Nj .We assume standard L-smoothness, bounded stochastic-gradient variance σ2, and bounded client heterogeneity: 

> C

X

> c=1

pc ∥∇ F rc (Θ) − ∇ F r (Θ) ∥2 ≤ G2. (33) To capture scheduler-induced objective changes, assume 

F r+1 (Θ r+1 ) − F r (Θ r+1 ) ≤ δr , ¯δR = 1

R

> R−1

X

> r=0

δr .

(34) 

Theorem 4. Suppose each participating client performs E

local SGD steps with a sufficiently small learning rate η,followed by FedAvg aggregation. Then 

1

R

> R−1

X

> r=0

E∥∇ F r (Θ r )∥2 ≤ 2( F 0(Θ 0) − Finf )

ηER 

+ O(ησ 2) + O(η2E2G2)+ O

 ¯δR

ηE 



,

(35) 

where Finf is a common finite lower bound. Proof sketch. For a fixed round-r objective, standard Local-SGD/FedAvg analysis [16], [17], [18] gives, for sufficiently small η,

E[F r (Θ r+1 )] ≤ E[F r (Θ r )] − cηE E∥∇ F r (Θ r )∥2

+ C1η2Eσ 2 + C2η3E3G2, (36) for constants c, C 1, C 2 > 0.Since the scheduler changes the task weights between rounds, (34) implies 

F r+1 (Θ r+1 ) ≤ F r (Θ r+1 ) + δr .

Combining the two inequalities and summing over rounds gives 

cηE 

> R−1

X

> r=0

E∥∇ F r (Θ r )∥2 ≤ F 0(Θ 0) − Finf 

+ O(Rη 2Eσ 2)+ O(Rη 3E3G2) + R¯δR.

(37) Dividing by cηER and absorbing fixed constants into O(·)

yields (35). The bound contains the standard optimization, stochastic-gradient, and client-heterogeneity terms, together with an addi-tional term caused by scheduler-induced objective variation. If 

η = Θ( R−1/2), E is fixed, and ¯δR = o(R−1/2), this additional tracking term vanishes asymptotically. This is a conditional result and does not imply that the scheduler itself guarantees this decay rate. V. E VALUATION RESULTS 

A. Multitask FL Setup 

We evaluate our framework on a two-task vision workload consisting of Stanford Cars [7] and Oxford Flowers 102 [8], using a shared ResNet backbone with task-specific classifi-cation heads. All experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA Tesla V100-SXM2 GPU with 32 GB of memory. We use 100 federated clients and randomly select 30% of them in each communication round. Each selected client performs one local epoch with 200 training steps using a learning rate of 10 −3. Full-model FedAvg is used to aggregate both the shared backbone and all the task-specific heads. 

B. Inference Workloads 

We consider both synthetic and real-trace-driven inference workloads. For the synthetic workload, we generate indepen-dent Poisson arrivals for Cars and Flowers with a baseline rate of 3 requests/s. To emulate bursty demand, the arrival rate of the selected task is increased by a factor of 4 during predefined burst intervals. Request timestamps are aggregated into fixed-length windows and used as arrival inputs to the online scheduler. For the real-trace-driven workload, we derive task arrivals from the Alibaba Cluster Trace 2018 [19]. The trace contains production workloads collected from approximately 4,000 ma-chines over eight days, including colocated online services and batch workloads. Instances are divided into two task streams according to their normalized CPU and memory demands, with high-demand instances assigned to Cars and the remaining instances assigned to Flowers. We then normalize the two streams to maximum arrival counts of 900 and 200 requests per slot, respectively. 1 50 100 150 200 250       

> Round
> 200 300 400 500 600 700
> Requests
> Synthetic Workload
> Stanford Cars Oxford Flowers
> (a) Synthetic workload 150 100 150 200 250
> Round
> 0200 400 600 800
> Requests
> Alibaba Trace-Derived Workload
> Stanford Cars Oxford Flowers (b) Alibaba workload

Fig. 2: Task-specific inference workloads: (a) synthetic and (b) real Alibaba cluster trace, used in our experiments. Figure 2 shows the two inference workloads used in our experiments. As shown in Figure 2, the synthetic workload contains a controlled burst in Stanford Cars while Oxford Flowers remains relatively stable. In contrast, the Alibaba trace-derived workload exhibits multiple irregular demand peaks. Together, these workloads allow us to evaluate DART-FL under both controlled and realistic workload dynamics. 

C. Scheduling and Metrics 

We obtain the maximum inference service capacity from offline hardware profiling. At each scheduling interval, the proposed scheduler first determines the minimum inference resource ratio required to satisfy the target SLO and allocates the remaining capacity to training. It then uses task-specific inference demand to determine the training allocation across tasks and the corresponding dynamic loss weights. We compare DART-FL with two scheduling baselines. 

Round Robin distributes the available training opportunities evenly across tasks, without considering task-specific inference demand. Burst-Aware FIFO prioritizes training according to the current inference demand, assigning training opportunities first to the task with the dominant request workload. It there-fore reacts aggressively to workload bursts, but may provide limited training opportunities to lower-demand tasks. We report per-task accuracy, overall multitask accuracy, inference and training resource ratios, and queue backlog. We evaluate accuracy during burst periods to determine whether demand-aware scheduling advances the learning progress of high-demand tasks to earlier rounds while maintaining com-parable long-term model accuracy. 

D. Overall Performance 

Figure 3 reports the inference accuracy under the synthetic workload. During the Cars burst, DART-FL dynamically increases the training priority of Stanford Cars. Averaged over the burst period, DART-FL improves the Cars inference accuracy by 5.17% over Round Robin, with the instantaneous improvement reaching up to 15.9% during the most demanding burst rounds. These results demonstrate that demand-aware training enables the high-demand task to reach higher accuracy earlier, precisely when its inference service demand increases. This additional training emphasis on Stanford Cars temporarily reduces the training capacity available to Oxford Flowers, 50 100 150 200 250 

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Inference Accuracy
> DART-FL (Ours) Round Robin Burst-Aware FIFO

(a) Stanford Cars 50 100 150 200 250  

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Inference Accuracy
> DART-FL (Ours) Round Robin Burst-Aware FIFO

(b) Oxford Flowers 

Fig. 3: Inference accuracy under the synthetic workload. The dashed lines indicate the burst period in Stanford Cars. resulting in a moderate decrease in its inference accuracy during the same period. Burst-Aware FIFO exhibits a more aggressive behavior. Since Cars dominates the workload during the burst, it assigns nearly all available training opportunities to Cars. Conse-quently, Stanford Cars achieves the highest inference accuracy, but Oxford Flowers receives almost no training and therefore maintains very low inference accuracy. This result exposes the limitation of directly following the dominant workload: aggressively prioritizing the high-demand task can effectively starve other tasks. In contrast, DART-FL increases the training priority of Stanford Cars while preserving non-zero training capacity for Oxford Flowers, providing a more balanced response to bursty demand. Figure 4 further evaluates the methods using the Alibaba trace-derived workload. Unlike the controlled synthetic work-load, the Alibaba trace contains multiple irregular Cars de-mand peaks, highlighted by the dashed regions in Fig. 4(a). We compute the average inference accuracy over all rounds within each peak interval. Compared with Round Robin, DART-FL improves the average Cars inference accuracy from 0.618 to 0.654, from 0.650 to 0.727, and from 0.641 to 0.712 over the three peak periods, corresponding to relative improvements of 5.83%, 11.85%, and 11.08%, respectively. These results show that DART-FL consistently adapts training priorities to changes in task demand, even under the more irregular workload dynamics of the real-world trace. The increased emphasis on Stanford Cars is accompanied by a temporary reduction in Oxford Flowers accuracy because less training capacity is allocated to the lower-demand task during these burst periods. Nevertheless, DART-FL continues to reserve training capacity for Flowers, preventing its learning progress from being completely stalled. Burst-Aware FIFO again represents a more aggressive alternative: by heavily prioritizing the dominant Cars workload, it achieves high Cars accuracy at the cost of providing very limited training oppor-tunities to Flowers. As a result, its Flowers inference accuracy remains substantially low. DART-FL therefore achieves a better balance between responding to high-demand tasks and maintaining the learning progress of other tasks. 50 100 150 200 250 

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Inference Accuracy
> DART-FL (Ours) Round Robin Burst-Aware FIFO

(a) Stanford Cars 50 100 150 200 250  

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Inference Accuracy
> DART-FL (Ours) Round Robin Burst-Aware FIFO

(b) Oxford Flowers 

Fig. 4: Inference accuracy under the Alibaba trace-derived workload. The dashed lines indicate the burst periods in Stanford Cars. 

E. Runtime Adaptation Behavior 

To understand how these accuracy improvements are achieved, Figure 5 illustrates the scheduling behavior of DART-FL under the synthetic workload. As shown in Fig-ure 5(a), the inference resource ratio increases from approx-imately 0.2 to 0.5 during the Cars burst, while the training ratio decreases accordingly. The SLO-aware resource allocator therefore reacts to the increased inference demand by reserving more computation for request processing instead of maintain-ing a fixed inference-training resource split. A similar adaptive behavior is observed under the Alibaba workload in Figure 5(c). Since the Alibaba trace contains multiple irregular demand peaks, the inference–training re-source split varies more frequently over time. During pe-riods of increased inference demand, DART-FL increases the inference resource ratio and correspondingly reduces the resources assigned to training. When the demand decreases, more computation is returned to model training. These re-sults demonstrate that DART-FL can dynamically adapt the inference–training resource split under both controlled and real-world workload variations. At the same time, DART-FL adapts how the remaining training capacity is distributed across tasks. As shown in Figure 5(b), the normalized training loss weights are approxi-mately balanced before the burst. When the Cars burst occurs, the Stanford Cars weight increases from approximately 0.5 to 0.6, while the Oxford Flowers weight decreases from approx-imately 0.5 to 0.4. Thus, DART-FL performs adaptation at two levels: it first increases the resources allocated to inference and then shifts the remaining training effort toward the high-demand Cars task. This coordinated adaptation enables Cars to improve its model accuracy during the burst and explains the corresponding inference accuracy gains in Figure 3. A similar behavior is observed under the Alibaba trace-derived workload. As shown in Figure 5(d), the normalized task weights dynamically change with the time-varying de-mand. The Stanford Cars weight remains generally higher when Cars demand dominates, while the Oxford Flowers weight is reduced accordingly. Compared with the controlled synthetic burst, these changes are more irregular because the Alibaba trace contains multiple demand fluctuations. Together with the adaptive inference-training resource split in Fig-50 100 150 200 250 

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Resource Ratio
> Inference Training

(a) Synthetic: resource ratio 50 100 150 200 250  

> Round
> 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
> Normalized Training Loss Weight
> Stanford Cars Oxford Flowers

(b) Synthetic: task weights 50 100 150 200 250 

> Round
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Resource Ratio
> Inference Training

(c) Alibaba: resource ratio 50 100 150 200 250  

> Round
> 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
> Normalized Task Training Weight
> Stanford Cars Oxford Flowers

(d) Alibaba: task weights 

Fig. 5: Adaptive scheduling behavior of DART-FL under synthetic and Alibaba trace-derived inference workloads. ure 5(c), these results show that DART-FL can jointly adapt resource allocation and task-level training priorities under real-world workload dynamics. Importantly, the Oxford Flowers training weight remains non-zero throughout the burst. This distinguishes DART-FL from Burst-Aware FIFO, which can devote nearly all available training opportunities to the dominant Cars workload and effectively stall the Flowers training. Hence, DART-FL responds to bursty demand while continuing to preserve training progress for lower-demand tasks. Overall, the results demonstrate the trade-off between de-mand responsiveness and multitask balance. Round Robin maintains balanced training but cannot respond to task-specific demand changes, whereas Burst-Aware FIFO aggressively follows the dominant workload and can starve lower-demand tasks. DART-FL avoids these two extremes by jointly adapt-ing the inference-training resource split and the task-level training weights. Consequently, it accelerates learning and improves model accuracy for high-demand tasks during burst periods while preserving appropriate training opportunities for lower-demand tasks, achieving a better balance between short-term demand responsiveness and sustained multitask learning. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we presented DART-FL, a burst-aware scheduling framework for multitask federated learning with concurrent inference and training. DART-FL dynamically adjusts the inference–training resource split and uses a queue-aware DPP-inspired scheduler to adapt task-level training weights according to time-varying inference demand. Experiments with synthetic and Alibaba trace-derived work-loads show that DART-FL improves the inference accuracy of high-demand tasks during burst periods while preserving training opportunities for other tasks. Compared with Round Robin and Burst-Aware FIFO, DART-FL achieves a bet-ter balance between demand responsiveness and multitask learning. Future work will extend the framework to larger-scale multitask systems with more heterogeneous clients and dynamic workloads. REFERENCES [1] S. Li, G. Yuan, Y. Wu, Y. Dai, C. Wu, A. K. Jones, J. Hu, Y. Wang, and X. Tang, “EdgeOL: Efficient in-situ online learning on edge devices,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16694 , 2024. [2] P. Han, S. Wang, Y. Jiao, and J. Huang, “Federated learning while providing model as a service: Joint training and inference optimization,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2024 – IEEE Conference on Computer Communi-cations , 2024, pp. 631–640. [3] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using uncer-tainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018, pp. 7482–7491. [4] O. Sener and V. Koltun, “Multi-task learning as multi-objective op-timization,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 31, 2018. [5] Z. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Zhong, V. Liu, Y. Sheng, X. Jin, Y. Huang, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez et al. , “ {AlpaServe }: Statistical multiplexing with model parallelism for deep learning serving,” in 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23) , 2023, pp. 663–679. [6] M. J. Neely, Stochastic Network Optimization with Application to Communication and Queueing Systems . Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2010. [7] J. Krause, M. Stark, J. Deng, and L. Fei-Fei, “3d object representations for fine-grained categorization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision Workshops , 2013, pp. 554–561. [8] M.-E. Nilsback and A. Zisserman, “Automated flower classification over a large number of classes,” in Proceedings of the Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing , 2008. [9] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. Ag¨ uera y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from de-centralized data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 54. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [10] H. Ma, H. Guo, and V. K. N. Lau, “Communication-efficient federated multitask learning over wireless networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 609–624, 2023. [11] W. Zhuang, Y. Wen, L. Lyu, and S. Zhang, “MAS: Towards resource-efficient federated multiple-task learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 23 414–23 424. [12] R. Han, J. Wang, Q. Qi, D. Chen, Z. Zhuang, H. Sun, X. Fu, J. Liao, and S. Guo, “Dynamic network slice for bursty edge traffic,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3142–3157, 2024. [13] S. Bi, L. Huang, H. Wang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Lyapunov-guided deep reinforcement learning for stable online computation offloading in mobile-edge computing networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 7519–7537, 2021. [14] L. Dai, J. Mei, Z. Yang, Z. Tong, C. Zeng, and K. Li, “Lyapunov-guided deep reinforcement learning for delay-aware online task offloading in MEC systems,” Journal of Systems Architecture , vol. 153, p. 103194, 2024. [15] J. D. C. Little, “A proof for the queuing formula: L = lambda w,” 

Operations Research , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 383–387, 1961. [16] S. U. Stich, “Local sgd converges fast and communicates little,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [17] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. U. Stich, and A. T. Suresh, “SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 119, 2020, pp. 5132–5143. [18] M. R. Glasgow, H. Yuan, and T. Ma, “Sharp bounds for federated averaging (local sgd) and continuous perspective,” in Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,vol. 151, 2022, pp. 9050–9090. [19] Alibaba Group, “Alibaba cluster trace program: Cluster trace 2018,” https://github.com/alibaba/clusterdata, 2018.