Title: HybridFLow: SDN-Orchestrated Client Partitioning for Hybrid Federated Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10404v1

Published Time: Thu, 10 Sep 2026 01:22:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# HybridFLow: SDN-Orchestrated Client Partitioning for Hybrid Federated Learning 

Osama Abu Hamdan ∗, Rabin Pandey ‡, Hao Che ∗, Engin Arslan †, Md Arifuzzaman ‡∗University of Texas at Arlington oma8085@mavs.uta.edu, hche@cse.uta.edu 

†Meta Platforms, Inc. enginarslan@meta.com 

‡Missouri University of Science and Technology rp5dm@mst.edu, marifuzzaman@mst.edu 

Abstract —Cross-silo Federated Learning (FL) enables geo-graphically distributed institutions to collaboratively train ma-chine learning models without sharing raw data. In wide-area de-ployments, however, communication delays often dominate round completion time and exacerbate the straggler effect. Hybrid FL addresses this challenge by combining synchronous and asyn-chronous client participation, but effective partitioning requires visibility into network conditions such as shared bottlenecks, link utilization, and path contention that individual clients cannot observe. We present HybridFLow , a closed-loop SDN-driven orchestration framework that integrates network-layer intelli-gence directly into hybrid FL. Leveraging the SDN controller’s global topology view, HybridFLow generates calibrated per-client communication-time estimates before each training round and uses them to partition clients into synchronous and asynchronous groups while balancing round latency and update staleness. After each round, measured communication times are fed back to the controller to continuously refine future predictions. Experimental results across multiple network topologies show that HybridFLow 

reaches 80% target accuracy 33–40% faster than SmartFLow 

and reduces average round duration by 30–40 seconds, while 

FedAsync fails to reach the target accuracy under non-IID data distributions. 

Index Terms —Hybrid Federated Learning, Software-Defined Networking, Network Orchestration, Client Partitioning 

I. I NTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 

Cross-silo Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging class of distributed AI workload in which geographically separated institutions collaboratively train a shared model without ex-changing raw data [1], [2]. Unlike datacenter-local training, cross-silo FL runs over wide-area networks with heteroge-neous bandwidth, latency, and congestion [3], [4], making communication management the central systems challenge. In synchronous FL, the server must wait for every partici-pating client before aggregating model updates, so training throughput is gated by the slowest network path. As Fig. 1 illustrates, this straggler effect inflates per-round completion time by over 47% compared to optimized routing [5], with the penalty growing with topology scale and link heterogeneity. Fully asynchronous FL [6] removes the synchronization barrier by integrating updates as they arrive, but under non-IID data distributions fast clients dominate aggregation while slow clients contribute stale gradients, degrading model con-vergence. As Fig. 2 shows, asynchronous FL fails to reach 

Fig. 1: Straggler effect in synchronous FL. Round completion time is capped by the slowest client, forcing all faster partic-ipants to idle. target accuracy under data heterogeneity [7], [8]. Hybrid FL addresses this trade-off by assigning a synchronous subset of clients per round while allowing the remainder to contribute asynchronously [8], preserving convergence quality without waiting on the slowest paths. Realizing the benefits of hybrid FL depends on correctly identifying which clients are likely to hold up the synchronous phase before each round begins. In cross-silo settings, this is fundamentally a network question: a client with capable hardware but a congested WAN path behaves as a straggler regardless of its local compute speed, and that congestion is invisible to the FL endpoints. End-host measurements expose only local symptoms; they cannot reveal whether candidate paths share bottleneck links with other clients, or how background traffic will evolve over the duration of a round. The partitioning decision therefore calls for a signal that no individual client can generate on its own. Software-Defined Networking provides exactly that signal. An SDN controller maintains a topology-wide view of link utilization, latency, loss, and path contention across the entire WAN [9]. This global control-plane visibility is structurally distinct from anything observable at the compute layer: it captures shared bottlenecks, cross-client path interference, and network-wide congestion state that endpoint measurements cannot reach. Integrating this visibility into hybrid FL allows arXiv:2609.10404v1 [cs.NI] 9 Sep 2026 Fig. 2: Convergence under non-IID data. Asynchronous FL eliminates the straggler bottleneck but fails to reach target ac-curacy under data heterogeneity, motivating a hybrid approach. network-wide conditions to inform sync/async partitioning decisions. 

HybridFLow is a closed-loop SDN orchestration framework for Hybrid Federated Learning in cross-silo deployments. It leverages real-time network telemetry from the SDN controller to generate calibrated per-client communication-time estimates and incorporates them into a cost-minimization algorithm that balances synchronous round latency against the staleness risk of asynchronous updates. By integrating topology-wide network intelligence directly into sync/async partitioning de-cisions, HybridFLow brings the network control plane into the Hybrid FL orchestration loop. The framework establishes a round-gated feedback mechanism in which communication-time estimates guide path assignment and client partitioning before each round, while measured transfer times continuously refine future estimates, closing the control loop without reac-tive mid-round rerouting. This paper makes three contributions: (1) a closed-loop SDN-FL orchestration architecture that translates network telemetry into per-round sync/async training-mode decisions; (2) a network-aware hybrid partitioning algorithm that bal-ances synchronous round latency against asynchronous stale-ness risk using calibrated communication-time estimates from the SDN control plane; and (3) an emulated cross-silo eval-uation demonstrating reduced round time and faster time-to-target accuracy under non-IID data distributions. II. R ELATED WORK 

Communication efficiency in FL has been extensively stud-ied through gradient compression, quantization, and selec-tive parameter updates [10]–[13]. These approaches reduce communication volume and improve scalability, but operate primarily at the model and update levels. As a result, they do not directly address network-level factors such as path contention, routing inefficiencies, or time-varying congestion, which frequently dominate completion time in wide-area cross-silo FL deployments. The synchronization bottleneck has motivated asynchronous and hybrid training paradigms. FedAsync [6] demonstrated that a server can integrate updates without waiting for all clients, while AsyncFedED [7] introduced distance-based weighting to reduce the impact of stale updates. Hybrid FL further balances convergence quality and training throughput by maintaining a synchronous subset of clients while allowing slower partic-ipants to contribute asynchronously [8]. Existing hybrid ap-proaches typically derive sync/async decisions from compute-layer information such as local training time, dataset size, gra-dient characteristics, or historical round latency. While these signals capture important aspects of client heterogeneity, they provide limited visibility into network-wide conditions such as shared bottlenecks, path contention, and evolving WAN congestion. In cross-silo environments, where communication time often dominates round completion time, incorporating network-layer information into the partitioning process rep-resents a natural extension of existing hybrid FL strategies. The intersection of SDN and FL has recently attracted increasing attention. Ma et al. [14] surveyed the challenges and opportunities of SDN-assisted FL systems, while Mahmod et al. [15] demonstrated SDN-based bandwidth provisioning to mitigate link saturation during FL communication rounds. Mahmoud et al. [16] further explored SDN-guided client selection as a mechanism for improving model quality. These studies highlight the value of network visibility and control for improving FL performance, but focus primarily on resource allocation and participant selection. Our prior work, Smart-FLow [5], leveraged ONOS-based telemetry and topology-aware routing to reduce synchronization time in cross-silo FL by up to 47% relative to static routing. However, SmartFLow 

retained a fully synchronous training model and therefore remained susceptible to network-induced stragglers. 

HybridFLow extends prior SDN-assisted FL approaches by using SDN telemetry not only to optimize communication paths, but also to inform application-level training orches-tration. Specifically, network-derived communication-time es-timates are incorporated directly into the hybrid sync/async partitioning process, enabling the network control plane to participate in per-round training-mode decisions. To the best of our knowledge, prior SDN-assisted FL studies have not used topology-wide network telemetry as a control signal for hybrid synchronous/asynchronous client partitioning in cross-silo federated learning. III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW 

HybridFLow is organized across two cooperating but in-dependent layers, as illustrated in Fig. 3: an SDN Controller 

layer implemented in Java on the ONOS platform [17], and a 

Federated Learning layer implemented in Python using the Flower framework [18]. A lightweight ZeroMQ messaging interface connects the two layers. The SDN layer handles network monitoring, path scoring, and per-client communica-tion time estimation; the FL layer handles client partitioning, training orchestration, and model aggregation. Neither layer accesses the internal state of the other; the messaging protocol serves as the sole interface. The remainder of this section presents the system in three parts. First, the SDN layer establishes the network-level infrastructure that produces per-client communication time Fig. 3: HybridFLow architecture. The SDN controller produces calibrated per-client communication time estimates via the 

Flow Scheduler and Progress Tracker ; the FL server consumes them to partition clients and orchestrate hybrid aggregation. One Estimate Request –Measurement Report exchange per round closes the feedback loop. estimates. Second, the FL layer consumes those estimates to partition clients into synchronous and asynchronous groups and to orchestrate hybrid training. Third, the data exchange protocol that connects the two layers closes the feedback loop. 

A. SDN Layer 

The SDN layer builds on the ONOS controller and retains the Stats Parser , Client Store , and Link Store components introduced in SmartFLow [5]. These components continuously collect OpenFlow statistics from network devices, maintaining per-link estimates of available capacity F free  

> l

= Bl − Ul, one-way latency λl, and packet loss probability pl, all smoothed by an Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) over the three most recent measurements [19]. The Flow Scheduler 

and Progress Tracker from SmartFLow are retained in Hybrid-FLow and extended to support the hybrid FL workflow. 

1) The Path Assignment Problem: Assigning network paths to FL clients is a non-trivial decision because: (i) multiple candidate paths may connect each client to the server, with widely varying bandwidth, latency, and loss characteristics; (ii) paths share links, so assigning one client to a high-quality path reduces the available capacity for subsequent clients; and (iii) the quality of any assignment depends on real-time link conditions that change between rounds. The Flow Scheduler 

takes the current network state as input and produces, for every client in both the server-to-client (S2C) and client-to-server (C2S) directions, a single assigned path together with a calibrated transfer time estimate. To quantify path quality, the Flow Scheduler evaluates each candidate path P = ( l1, . . . , l m) (a sequence of directed links excluding edge links) on three complementary metrics. 

Projected Fair Share. The estimated per-client bandwidth on link l, assuming the incoming client joins the nl flows already traversing it, is: FairShare proj  

> l

= F free 

> l

nl + 1 . (1) The path-level fair share equals the bottleneck link’s share: FairShare proj  

> P

= min  

> l∈P

FairShare proj  

> l

. (2) 

nl is initialized from the per-link active-flow count reported by OpenFlow statistics and incremented by the Flow Scheduler 

each time a path using link l is assigned during the current scheduling sweep, so it reflects both existing background traffic load and the cumulative capacity consumed by earlier assignments within the same round. 

Effective RTT. The round-trip time of path P sums forward and reverse latencies across every link: RTT P = X

> l∈P

 λl + λ¯l

, (3) where ¯l denotes the reverse direction of link l. This formulation accurately models TCP behavior: data packets traverse the forward path while acknowledgment segments return along 

¯l, so the per-link contribution to round-trip time is precisely 

λl + λ¯l [20]. 

End-to-End Packet Loss. Under the assumption of inde-pendent link failures: 

pP = 1 − Y

> l∈P

(1 − pl). (4) 

Effective Score. Combining these metrics into a Mathis-variant throughput estimate [21]: EffScore (P ) = FairShare proj 

> P

RTT P · √pP + ε , (5) where ε is a small positive value that prevents division by zero when the measured packet loss on a path is negligible. A higher score indicates a path that delivers more throughput per unit time. Dividing the model size D (in megabits) by EffScore (P ) yields a raw transfer time estimate in seconds. While the classical Mathis formulation models steady-state TCP behavior under random drop conditions, we employ EffScore (P ) strictly as a comparative, network-layer utility proxy to rank candidate paths prior to transmission. Any real-world deviations from steady-state dynamics are captured and corrected downstream by the Progress Tracker ’s EWMA feedback loop, which adjusts raw estimates toward observed per-client transfer times across successive rounds. The Flow Scheduler interface is implementation-agnostic: any algorithm that maps the current network state to per-client path assignments and time estimates can serve as the scheduler. For instance, constraint programming formulations [5] and reinforcement learning-based solvers are both viable alter-natives. In HybridFLow , the current implementation uses a greedy allocation that, for each direction d ∈ { S2C , C2S },sorts clients in ascending order of their best available adjusted score so that the most constrained clients receive first choice of paths, assigns each client to its highest-scoring path, and increments the active-flow count on every link of the assigned path to reflect the capacity consumed by that assignment. Paths are assigned once per round, at the start of each training round; no dynamic reassignment occurs during the transfer phase. Because the Hybrid Partitioner divides clients into synchronous and asynchronous groups at the beginning of each round (Section III-B), fixing path assignments at the same point is a natural simplification that keeps the scheduling calculation tractable while ensuring consistency between routing and partitioning decisions. 

2) Correction Factors and Adjusted Scoring: Raw effec-tive scores are throughput-proxy values, not precise through-put predictions. To compensate for systematic bias, the 

Progress Tracker maintains a multiplicative correction factor CF (c, d, P ) for each (client, direction, path) triple, updated via EWMA after every round: 

r(t) 

> c,d,P

= T real ,(t)

> c,d

T raw ,(t)

> c,d

, T raw  

> c,d

= D

EffScore (P ) , (6) CF (t) 

> c,d,P

= β · r(t) + (1 − β) · CF (t−1) , (7) where β is the EWMA smoothing parameter that controls how rapidly the correction factor adapts to new observations. When per-client history is unavailable, the system falls back to aggregate correction data; if no historical data exists at all, the correction factor defaults to 1.0. The adjusted score and final time estimate are: AdjScore (P, c, d ) = EffScore (P )

CF (c, d, P ) , (8) 

ˆTc,d = D

AdjScore (P ∗

> c,d

, c, d ) . (9) Equation (9) yields a calibrated communication time estimate in seconds that improves with each round as the correction factor converges. 

B. FL Layer 

The FL layer receives per-client communication time esti-mates from the SDN layer and uses them to partition clients, orchestrate training, and aggregate model updates. 

1) Client State and Completion Time Estimation: The client state record tracks per-client state across rounds, including communication estimates and EWMA-smoothed computation times. The estimated total completion time for client c before round t is: 

Tc = ˆTc, S2C + ˆTc, C2S + ¯ tcomp  

> c

, (10) where ˆTc, S2C and ˆTc, C2S are the SDN-provided communication time estimates, and ¯tcomp  

> c

is the EWMA of client c’s observed local computation times. 

2) Gradient Importance Tracking: The gradient importance tracker maintains an EMA-smoothed estimate of each client’s gradient importance. After each round, it records the L2 norm of the parameter difference ∥glast  

> c

∥ = ∥wc − wglobal ∥2 for every client c that contributed an update. The global average is then updated: 

¯gnew = δ · ¯gold + (1 − δ) · 1

|R|

X

> c∈R

∥glast  

> c

∥, (11) where δ is a smoothing parameter that controls how quickly the global average adapts to recent gradient magnitudes, and R

is the set of all clients that contributed updates in the current round (both synchronous and asynchronous). The per-client importance weight is: 

wimp  

> c

= ∥glast  

> c

∥

¯g . (12) In the first round, ∥glast  

> c

∥ = ¯ g = 1 .0, so all clients begin with uniform importance wimp  

> c

= 1 .0. Clients with above-average gradient norms ( wimp  

> c

> 1) contribute more to model improvement; assigning them to the asynchronous group car-ries a higher staleness penalty, biasing the partitioner toward keeping them synchronous. 

3) Network-Aware Client Partitioning: The Hybrid Par-titioner solves the core optimization problem of Hybrid-FLow : given estimated completion times {Tc} and importance weights {wimp  

> c

}, partition clients into a synchronous set S and an asynchronous set A = C \ S , minimizing a cost function that balances round latency against staleness risk. The cost function combines a sync latency term and an async penalty term, each normalized to [0 , 1] .The sync latency term measures how much the synchronous round duration exceeds its minimum possible value: 

Jsync (S) = max c∈S Tc − Tmin 

Tmax − Tmin 

, (13) where Tmin = Tckmin is the sync latency at the minimum sync set size kmin , and Tmax = Tcn is the slowest client’s estimated time. This min-max normalization ensures the term spans the full [0 , 1] range across all candidate split points. The async penalty term captures the staleness risk of the asynchronous group. For each asynchronous client c, gradient importance wimp  

> c

is weighted by a quadratic staleness proxy, Algorithm 1 Hybrid Partitioner : Greedy Sweep 

Require: Clients C, times {Tc}, weights {wimp  

> c

}, λ, kmin  

> 1:

Sort C by Tc: Tc1 ≤ · · · ≤ Tcn 

> 2:

Tmin ← Tckmin ; Tmax ← Tcn ; Pmax ←

AsyncPenalty (kmin ) 

> 3:

J∗ ← ∞ ; k∗ ← kmin  

> 4:

for k = kmin to n do  

> 5:

Js ← (Tck − Tmin ) / (Tmax − Tmin ) 

> 6:

Ja ← AsyncPenalty (k) / P max  

> 7:

J ← (1 − λ) · Js + λ · Ja 

> 8:

if J < J ∗ then J∗ ← J; k∗ ← k 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return S∗ = {c1, . . . , c k∗ }, A∗ = {ck∗+1 , . . . , c n}

penalizing clients whose completion time far exceeds the synchronous boundary: 

Jasync (S) = 

X

> c∈A

wimp  

> c

·

 Tc

max s∈S Ts

2

Pmax 

, (14) where Pmax is the raw penalty at the split with the largest async set, normalizing the term to [0 , 1] . The normalization constants Tmin , Tmax , and Pmax are computed once at the beginning of each sweep and remain fixed for its duration. The total cost combines the two terms as a convex combi-nation: 

J(S) = (1 − λ) Jsync (S) + λ J async (S), (15) subject to |S| ≥ M min  

> sync

. The trade-off parameter λ ∈ [0 , 1] 

governs the balance: λ = 0 minimizes sync latency alone (fastest rounds), λ = 1 minimizes the async penalty alone (safest convergence), and the default λ = 0 .5 weights both objectives equally. Because both constituent terms are nor-malized, λ has scale-independent semantics. Because all clients are sorted by Tc and the optimal split is a contiguous prefix of this ordering, the minimizer can be found by a greedy sweep in O(n log n) time, as formalized in Algorithm 1. 

4) Hybrid Aggregation: Once the Hybrid Partitioner deter-mines S and A, the hybrid server dispatches all asynchronous clients to background training immediately, then blocks on the completion of all synchronous clients. Completed asyn-chronous updates arrive at varying times and are deposited into a thread-safe buffer. Aggregation then proceeds in two stages. 

Stage 1: Synchronous Aggregation. The server aggregates synchronous results using the configured aggregation strategy. 

HybridFLow is compatible with any aggregation algorithm (e.g., FedAvg, FedProx); the choice of strategy is orthogonal to the partitioning and scheduling mechanisms described here. 

Stage 2: Asynchronous Integration. HybridFLow inte-grates buffered asynchronous updates following the staleness-aware aggregation framework introduced by FedAsync [6]. Each buffered update carries a staleness measure τc = tcurrent −

tsubmission ,c (in rounds). The per-client effective mixing coeffi-cient combines a configurable base mixing rate with a staleness decay: 

αeff ,c = αbase · fstaleness (τc), (16) where αbase ∈ [0 , 1] controls the maximum influence any single asynchronous update can exert. The staleness decay function 

fstaleness can be configured as polynomial (τ +1) −a, exponential 

e−aτ , or constant 1.0; the default is polynomial with a = 0 .5,matching the FedAsync formulation [6]. The buffered updates are first combined into a staleness-weighted average: 

wavg =

X

> c∈A

αeff ,c wc

X

> c∈A

αeff ,c 

. (17) This average is then merged with the synchronous model 

wsync through a collective coefficient that separates data frac-tion from staleness quality: 

αcoll = NA

NA + NS

× αeff 

αbase 

, (18) 

wnew = (1 − αcoll ) · wsync + αcoll · wavg . (19) The first factor reflects the asynchronous cohort’s share of the total training data; the second factor ( ∈ [0 , 1] ) scales that share proportionally to the mean staleness quality of the batch. Their product always lies in [0 , 1] , requiring no clamping heuristics. 

5) Async Dispatch and Re-Dispatch: Each asynchronous client is submitted to a thread-pool executor with a per-client queue depth of one: if a client already has an in-flight task, the dispatcher skips it. When an asynchronous client completes, the system deposits its update into the buffer and makes a re-dispatch decision based on round timing. If the client finished within the same round it was dispatched, it is not re-dispatched, because it may belong in the synchronous group in the next round’s partitioning. If the client finished after the server has already advanced to a new round, the system re-dispatches it with the latest global model to keep it productive until the next partitioning decision. 

C. FL-SDN Data Exchange Protocol HybridFLow coordinates its two layers through a proactive, round-gated data exchange protocol. The protocol comprises two message types exchanged once per round via ZeroMQ, ensuring that all path assignments and time estimates are finalized before any data transfer occurs. 

Estimate Request. At the start of round t, the FL server issues an estimate request to the SDN controller containing the current round number and the list of available client identifiers. The SDN controller invokes the Flow Scheduler to run path assignment and returns a map {ci 7 → [ ˆTci,S2C , ˆTci,C2S ]} of adjusted communication time estimates for all clients. The FL server applies these estimates to compute per-client completion times via Equation (10). Algorithm 2 HybridFLow : Per-Round Execution 

Require: Clients C, round t, λ, αbase , M min 

> sync

Phase 1: Estimation and Partitioning  

> 1:

ˆT ← QuerySDN (t, C ) ▷ Estimate Request  

> 2:

for all c ∈ C do  

> 3:

Tc ← ˆTc, S2C + ˆTc, C2S + ¯ tcomp  

> c
> 4:

end for  

> 5:

S, A ← HybridPartition (C, {Tc}, {wimp  

> c

}, λ, M min  

> sync

)

Phase 2: Training  

> 6:

Dispatch A to background training  

> 7:

RS ← TrainSync (S)

Phase 3: Two-Stage Aggregation  

> 8:

wsync ← Aggregate (RS ) ▷ Eq. via configured strategy  

> 9:

w(t) 

> global

← IntegrateAsync (wsync , Buffer ) ▷ Eqs. 16–19 

Phase 4: Update and Report  

> 10:

Update {wimp  

> c

} from R and w(t) 

> global
> 11:

ReportMeasurements (t, C ) ▷ Measurement Report  

> 12:

return w(t)

> global

Measurement Report. After the round concludes, the FL server sends a map {ci 7 → [T real 

> ci,S2C

, T real 

> ci,C2S

]} of measured communication times to the SDN controller. The Progress Tracker uses these measurements to update the EWMA cor-rection factors per Equation (7), closing the feedback loop and improving estimation accuracy in subsequent rounds. 

D. End-to-End Round Execution 

Algorithm 2 summarizes the complete per-round execution of HybridFLow , integrating the SDN and FL layers through the data exchange protocol described in Section III-C. A key property of Algorithm 2 is that both path assignment and partitioning complete before training begins, eliminating the measurement instability associated with mid-round switch-ing. The round execution unfolds in four phases. 

Phase 1: Estimation and Partitioning. The FL server issues an estimate request to the SDN controller, which runs the Flow Scheduler and returns calibrated per-client commu-nication time estimates. Using these estimates, each client’s total completion time Tc is computed per Equation (10). The 

Hybrid Partitioner then minimizes the cost function J(S)

(Equation 15) via a greedy sweep over clients sorted by Tc,producing the optimal sync set S and async set A.

Phase 2: Training. The server dispatches all clients in 

A concurrently to background training and blocks on the completion of all clients in S. Asynchronous updates complete at varying times and are deposited into the thread-safe async buffer as they arrive. 

Phase 3: Two-Stage Aggregation. Stage 1 aggregates the synchronous results RS to produce the intermediate model 

wsync . Stage 2 computes a staleness-weighted average of all buffered async updates per Equation (17) and merges it into 

wsync with the collective coefficient of Equation (18), yielding the updated global model w(t)

> global

. Clients that do not com-plete within the current round remain in-flight; their expected residual time naturally biases them toward asynchronous clas-sification in the next round’s partitioning. 

Phase 4: Update and Report. The FL server updates gradient importance weights {wimp  

> c

} from the parameter dif-ferences observed across all contributing clients relative to 

w(t)

> global

. It then reports real per-client communication times to the SDN controller, which uses them to update the EWMA correction factors per Equation (7), closing the feedback loop and improving path-score calibration in subsequent rounds. IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

The preceding sections established how HybridFLow lever-ages SDN-provided communication time estimates to partition clients into synchronous and asynchronous groups before each round, balancing round latency against staleness risk. The experiments in this section evaluate the resulting orchestration system along four axes: (1) per-round efficiency and syn-chronization blocking reduction, as the primary management outcome; (2) adaptivity of the sync/async partition to per-round network conditions; (3) accuracy of the SDN-layer closed-loop predictor that drives partitioning decisions; and (4) convergence speed, as evidence that the orchestration actions preserve ML utility. Together, these experiments test whether the SDN-FL design choices described in Section III-B translate into measurable management and training improvements under realistic network heterogeneity. 

A. Experimental Setup 

All experiments use FLEET [22] as the emulation frame-work and draw network topologies from the Gabriel collection in TopologyHub [23]. Three topologies of increasing scale define the evaluation scenarios: E1 with 15 switches and 15 FL clients, E2 with 25 switches and 25 clients, and E3 with 35 switches and 35 clients. All links operate at 100 Mbps, and background traffic follows a Poisson arrival process that injects time-varying congestion across the network. Every client runs on identical compute hardware, so that observed performance differences arise exclusively from network heterogeneity. The hardware platform is a single CPU-only server equipped with 128 GB RAM and an AMD EPYC 9124 16-core, 32-thread processor. All experiments use a fixed dataset and model to isolate the impact of network conditions on feder-ated learning performance. CIFAR-10 is partitioned using 

PathologicalPartitioner , which assigns 7 of the 10 label classes to each client, creating a non-IID setting in which asynchronous FL is particularly susceptible to gradient stal-eness and contribution imbalance. MobileNetV3-Large [24] is selected to generate realistic communication workloads; its 14.2 MB model size makes wide-area communication a significant contributor to round completion time, allowing the evaluation to capture the effects of network heterogeneity. As topology size increases, the training dataset is distributed across a larger number of clients (approximately 3,000 samples per client in E1, 2,000 in E2, and 1,500 in E3), while a (a) SmartFLow (b) HybridFLow 

Fig. 4: Per-round stacked time breakdown for topology E1. Each bar decomposes one client’s round into S2C transfer, local training, and C2S transfer; (a) shows SmartFLow , (b) shows HybridFLow . Stars in (b) mark clients reclassified as asynchronous. fixed 10,000-sample server-side evaluation set is used across all experiments. Emulation allows the same topology, traffic, and compute conditions to be replayed across baselines, isolating the ef-fect of network-aware partitioning while preserving realistic control-plane interaction through ONOS and OpenFlow. All three baselines run the same implementation stack (ONOS, Flower, ZeroMQ) and share identical hardware and back-ground traffic conditions, so observed differences arise exclu-sively from the partitioning strategy. 

Fig. 5: Average round time for SmartFLow and HybridFLow 

across E1, E2, and E3. HybridFLow reduces synchronization blocking by removing network-induced tail clients from the synchronous phase, cutting average round time by 30-40 sec-onds in every topology. Three training configurations are compared. Smart-FLow uses SDN-optimized routing with fully synchronous training, while FedAsync follows the FedAsync protocol [6]. 

HybridFLow combines synchronous and asynchronous partic-ipation through network-aware client partitioning. For consis-tency, HybridFLow adopts the FedAvgM aggregation strat-egy used by SmartFLow (server_momentum = 0.9)and the exponential staleness function used by FedAsync 

(staleness_alpha =0.25 , mixing_alpha =0.75 ). Fi-nally, HybridFLow uses λ = 0.35 in Equation (15), se-lected from preliminary experiments on E1. Across λ ∈{0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8}, performance varied smoothly, with λ =

Fig. 6: Distribution of per-round asynchronous-to-total client ratio for HybridFLow across E1, E2, and E3. Each violin encodes the full empirical distribution; a horizontal bar marks the median. 

0.35 providing a balanced trade-off between round latency and update staleness. Training terminates when server evaluation accuracy reaches 80%, making time-to-target-accuracy the primary met-ric. This criterion directly reflects how quickly each method produces a usable model under identical network conditions. Any method that fails to reach the target within the experiment budget is reported at its final achieved accuracy. 

B. Results 

The central outcome of HybridFLow is the reduction of synchronization blocking during federated learning rounds. Fig. 4 shows the mechanism: network transfer time is substan-tial for straggler clients, whose bars are visibly elongated by S2C and C2S segments. SmartFLow must wait each round for these slowest clients, whereas HybridFLow reclassifies them as asynchronous (starred bars) and closes the round without them. Their updates are not discarded; they are incorporated asynchronously in subsequent rounds, subject to a staleness penalty, preserving their contribution while removing their latency from the synchronous phase. Per-client communication cost remains comparable between the two methods, indicating that the improvement arises from reduced synchronization delay rather than reduced communication volume. (a) Topology E1 (b) Topology E2 (c) Topology E3 

Fig. 7: Predicted vs. actual communication and computing time for HybridFLow across E1, E2, and E3. Close tracking validates the closed-loop control mechanism: measurements reported after each round calibrate the SDN controller’s future estimates, keeping prediction error low enough for reliable per-round orchestration.   

> (a) Topology E1 (b) Topology E2 (c) Topology E3

Fig. 8: Server evaluation accuracy versus wall-clock time for topologies E1, E2, and E3. Each subplot compares SmartFLow ,

FedAsync , and HybridFLow . HybridFLow reaches the 80% target first in all three topologies, while FedAsync fails to reach the target in any topology. Fig. 5 confirms this at the aggregate level: average round time drops by 30–40 seconds for HybridFLow relative to 

SmartFLow in every topology, a reduction that is consistent across E1, E2, and E3. The box-plot spread for HybridFLow 

is narrower in E1 and E2, reflecting more predictable round durations when stragglers are excluded; in E3, richer path diversity at 35-client scale introduces greater round-to-round variability that offsets the variance reduction. Fig. 6 shows that the SDN control plane does not apply a static policy: no violin collapses to a point across any topology. Distribution shape tracks network heterogeneity— skewed toward low async fractions in E1, shifted higher in E2 as greater path diversity increases reclassification frequency, and approximately symmetric in E3 where 35-client topology variability balances low- and high-reclassification rounds. The correlation between distribution shape and topology scale con-firms that the partitioner continuously adjusts the synchronous boundary in response to per-round network conditions. The closed-loop control mechanism is validated by Fig. 7, which overlays predicted and actual communication and com-puting times across all rounds and topologies. Communication MAE is 7.2 s (E1), 6.2 s (E2), and 9.2 s (E3); computing MAE stays below 1.5 s in all three. The close tracking validates the EWMA correction mechanism (Equation 7), which calibrates the SDN controller’s estimates using real measurements re-ported after each round. Reliable prediction is a prerequisite for the round-time gains: misclassifying clients—retaining stragglers synchronously or ejecting fast ones prematurely— would negate the benefit. The management actions preserve convergence quality. Fig. 8 validates this across all three topologies: HybridFLow 

reaches the 80% accuracy target 33–40% faster than Smart-FLow in every configuration, a consistent advantage from the 15-client E1 topology through the 35-client E3 topology. 

FedAsync fails to reach the 80% target in any topology under non-IID data, confirming that unconstrained asynchronous ag-gregation accumulates stale gradients that prevent convergence when data distributions are heterogeneous. Taken together, the SDN-FL orchestration pipeline is co-herent: accurate closed-loop time prediction (Fig. 7) enables reliable per-round partitioning (Fig. 6), which reduces syn-chronization blocking (Fig. 5) without sacrificing convergence quality (Fig. 8). The net effect is a 33–40% reduction in time-to-target-accuracy compared to SmartFLow , achieved without the convergence degradation that affects FedAsync under non-IID data distributions. C. Limitations of the Study 

The evaluation is conducted in an emulated cross-silo envi-ronment rather than a production WAN deployment. While this enables analysis of network-aware partitioning with realistic SDN control-plane interactions, validation at larger scales and across operational WANs remains future work. HybridFLow 

assumes the availability of topology-wide SDN telemetry, which is appropriate for enterprise, campus, research or private networks but may not apply where network visibility is limited or routing decisions are controlled by external providers. Finally, the current design assumes trustworthy telemetry and well-behaved participants; the effects of telemetry inaccura-cies, controller failures, and adversarial clients remain open directions for future work. V. C ONCLUSION 

HybridFLow is a closed-loop SDN orchestration framework for Hybrid Federated Learning in cross-silo environments. Unlike existing hybrid FL approaches that rely primarily on compute-layer signals, HybridFLow incorporates topology-wide network telemetry into per-round sync/async partition-ing decisions through an SDN control plane. By combining communication-time prediction, network-aware partitioning, and feedback-driven calibration within a unified orchestration loop, HybridFLow enables training decisions that account for both communication latency and update staleness. Experi-ments across emulated cross-silo topologies demonstrate that network-aware orchestration reduces synchronization blocking while preserving convergence quality under non-IID data distributions. Relative to SmartFLow , HybridFLow reaches the 80% accuracy target 33–40% faster and reduces average round duration by 30–40 seconds across all evaluated topolo-gies. These results demonstrate that topology-aware network telemetry can serve as an effective control signal for hybrid federated learning orchestration, enabling communication-aware training decisions in heterogeneous wide-area environ-ments. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The work in this study was supported in part by NSF grant 2427408 and 2451376. The authors used LLM tools (ChatGPT and Claude) for text formatting. All scientific content including experimental design, analysis, results, figures, and citations is the authors’ own. REFERENCES [1] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage et al. , “Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 54. PMLR, 20–22 Apr 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [2] K. A. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp et al. , “Towards federated learning at scale: System design,” in Proceedings of the Second Con-ference on Machine Learning and Systems, SysML 2019, Stanford, CA, USA, March 31 - April 2, 2019 . mlsys.org, 2019. [3] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent et al. , “Advances and open problems in federated learning,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn. ,vol. 14, no. 1–2, p. 1–210, Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000083 [4] L. Lyu, H. Yu, X. Ma et al. , “Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks and defenses,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 8726–8746, 2024. [5] O. A. Hamdan, H. Che, E. Arslan, and M. Arifuzzaman, “Smartflow: A communication-efficient sdn framework for cross-silo federated learn-ing,” in 2026 IEEE 23rd Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC) , 2026, pp. 1–6. [6] C. Xie, S. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Asynchronous federated optimization,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03934 [7] Q. Wang, Q. Yang, S. He et al. , “Asyncfeded: Asynchronous federated learning with euclidean distance based adaptive weight aggregation,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13797 [8] E. T. Mart´ ınez Beltr´ an, M. Q. P´ erez, P. M. S. S´ anchez et al. , “Decen-tralized federated learning: Fundamentals, state of the art, frameworks, trends, and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2983–3013, 2023. [9] B. A. A. Nunes, M. Mendonca, X.-N. Nguyen et al. , “A survey of software-defined networking: Past, present, and future of programmable networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1617–1634, 2014. [10] A. Malekijoo, M. J. Fadaeieslam, H. Malekijou et al. , “Fedzip: A compression framework for communication-efficient federated learning,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01593 [11] Y. He, H.-P. Wang, M. Zenk, and M. Fritz, “Cossgd: Communication-efficient federated learning with a simple cosine-based quantization,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.08241 [12] N. Bouacida, J. Hou, H. Zang, and X. Liu, “Adaptive federated dropout: Improving communication efficiency and generalization for federated learning,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2021 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS) , 2021, pp. 1–6. [13] J. Koneˇ cn´ y, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu et al. , “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492 [14] X. Ma, L. Liao, Z. Li, R. X. Lai, and M. Zhang, “Applying federated learning in software-defined networks: A survey,” Symmetry ,vol. 14, no. 2, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/14/2/195 [15] A. Mahmod, G. Caliciuri, P. Pace, and A. Iera, “Improving the quality of federated learning processes via software defined networking,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Networked AI Systems , ser. NetAISys ’23. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3597062.3597281 [16] A. Mahmod, P. Pace, and A. Iera, “Sdn-assisted client selection to enhance the quality of federated learning processes,” in 2024 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) , 2024, pp. 1–6. [17] P. Berde, M. Gerola, J. Hart et al. , “Onos: towards an open, distributed sdn os,” in Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Hot Topics in Software Defined Networking , ser. HotSDN ’14. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 1–6. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2620728.2620744 [18] D. J. Beutel, T. Topal, A. Mathur et al. , “Flower: A friendly federated learning research framework,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14390 [19] C. Metter, V. Burger, Z. Hu et al. , “Towards an active probing extension for the onos sdn controller,” in 2018 28th International Telecommuni-cation Networks and Applications Conference (ITNAC) , 2018, pp. 1–8. [20] M. Allman, V. Paxson, and E. Blanton, “Tcp congestion control,” IETF, RFC 5681, Sep. 2009. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5681 [21] J. Padhye, V. Firoiu, D. Towsley, and J. Kurose, “Modeling tcp reno performance: a simple model and its empirical validation,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 133–145, 2000. [22] O. A. Hamdan, H. Che, E. Arslan, and M. Arifuzzaman, “Fleet: A feder-ated learning emulation and evaluation testbed for holistic research,” in 

2026 IEEE 23rd Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC) , 2026, pp. 1–6. [23] E. K. C ¸ etinkaya, M. J. Alenazi, Y. Cheng et al. , “On the fitness of geographic graph generators for modelling physical level topologies,” in 

2013 5th International Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT) , 2013, pp. 38–45. [24] A. Howard, M. Sandler, B. Chen et al. , “Searching for mobilenetv3,” in 

2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,2019, pp. 1314–1324.