Title: A GPU-Accelerated Blocked Adaptive Randomized Range Finder Based on an Implicit Householder QR Decomposition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28941v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:20:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# A GPU-Accelerated Blocked Adaptive Randomized Range Finder Based on an Implicit Householder QR Decomposition 

1st Carolin Penke 

J¨ ulich Supercomputing Centre Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich 

J¨ ulich, Germany c.penke@fz-juelich.de 

2nd Andreas Herten 

J¨ ulich Supercomputing Centre Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich 

J¨ ulich, Germany a.herten@fz-juelich.de 

Abstract —Low-rank methods can reduce the memory and computational requirements of deep neural network training in approaches such as GaLore. Randomized range finders offer an attractive alternative to singular value decompositions, partic-ularly when the required rank is determined adaptively from a prescribed approximation tolerance. We introduce a blocked adaptive randomized range finder based on an implicit House-holder QR decomposition and an optimized hybrid CPU–GPU implementation. The proposed method avoids explicit reorthog-onalization. Numerical experiments show that it preserves or-thogonality and approximation accuracy in regimes where block Gram–Schmidt without reorthogonalization becomes unstable. The blocked formulation exposes matrix–matrix operations and enables overlap of CPU panel factorization with GPU updates. On an NVIDIA GH200, the overlapped implementation reduces the runtime for the largest tested matrix from 9.91 s on the CPU to 0.407 s . The method provides a stable and efficient building block for low-rank approximation on heterogeneous systems with applications in computational science and engineering. 

Index Terms —randomized numerical linear algebra, random-ized range finder, low-rank approximation, Householder QR factorization, GPU acceleration, heterogeneous computing, low-rank deep learning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Dominant low-dimensional subspaces of a matrix, and their approximations, form a crucial element in many methods for solving problems in computational science, engineering, and machine learning. For a matrix A, its dominant left singular subspace is spanned by the singular vectors associated with its largest singular values. Such a subspace, represented by an orthonormal basis in matrix form, can serve as a starting point for efficiently com-puting an approximate truncated singular value decomposition (SVD). The SVD forms the basis of principal component analysis, a cornerstone of data analysis and feature selection, where directions are identified that capture the largest variation in a dataset. Our main motivating example comes from the training of deep neural networks. Modern architectures such as transform-ers place high demands on computation and GPU memory during pre-training and fine-tuning. Low-rank methods reduce these requirements by operating in reduced subspaces. In particular, GaLore and its successors project gradients onto a low-dimensional subspace and represent optimizer states in this reduced space, thereby reducing memory consumption [1]. Efficiently computing a basis for such subspaces is an impor-tant component of these methods. Classical model order reduction also provides applications, for example in the POD method [2]. A common computational problem underlying these exam-ples is the following. Given a matrix A ∈ Rm×n, the goal is to compute an orthonormal basis Q ∈ Rm×k that approximately captures the dominant range of A, in the sense that 

A ≈ QQ T A, QT Q = Ik, (1) where Ik denotes an identity matrix of size k. This basis yields the low-rank approximation 

A ≈ QB, B = QT A ∈ Rk×n. (2) Given an SVD A = U ΣV T , the Eckart–Young theorem gives a best rank-k approximation by choosing Q as the first 

k columns of U , yielding 

∥A − QQ T A∥2 = σk+1 .

Computing these vectors through a full SVD, for example through bidiagonalization followed by a divide-and-conquer method, however, is expensive [3]. In many applications, only a low-dimensional dominant subspace basis Q is required, so computing a full factorization performs substantially more work than necessary. Randomized numerical linear algebra provides efficient alternatives to classical matrix algorithms by incorporating random sampling while retaining numerical or probabilistic guarantees [4], [5]. Randomized range finders are a widely used class of methods for computing dominant subspaces. They can construct a basis either for a prescribed target rank or adaptively until a specified approximation tolerance is reached. Blocked randomized range finders expose matrix–matrix operations that are well suited to modern memory hierarchies arXiv:2608.28941v1 [math.NA] 28 Aug 2026 and accelerator architectures such as GPUs. Existing blocked adaptive formulations commonly rely on Gram–Schmidt or-thogonalization and explicit reorthogonalization [6], [7]. Be-sides their numerical stability implications, the resulting de-pendencies can limit the ability to overlap panel processing with matrix updates in hybrid CPU–GPU implementations. In this work, we generalize the framework of blocked Householder QR factorizations [8]–[10] to obtain a blocked adaptive randomized range finder. By representing the basis implicitly through blocked Householder reflectors, the re-sulting formulation avoids explicit reorthogonalization while exposing predominantly matrix–matrix operations. For the GPU implementation, we adapt the hybrid QR factorization strategy used in the GPU-accelerated MAGMA library [11], restructuring the computation to efficiently overlap CPU panel factorization with GPU-based matrix updates. Numerical ex-periments evaluate both the approximation quality and nu-merical stability of the proposed formulation as well as the performance of its hybrid CPU–GPU implementation on an NVIDIA GH200. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

The simplest version of a randomized range finder [5] approximates the dominant range of A by forming Y = AΩ

with a random matrix Ω and computing an orthonormal basis 

Q for range( Y ).

1. Ω ←randn(n,r) (fill Ω with random values) 

2. Y ←AΩ (matrix multiply) 

3. Q ←orth (Y ) (e.g. QR decomposition) Fig. 1: Randomized range finder with fixed rank r.When an oversampling parameter p ∈ N, 0 ≤ p ≤ r,is introduced, this procedure can compute a highly accurate approximation to the best-approximating subspace of rank 

r − p [5]. Instead of prescribing the rank, one may seek a rank r as low as possible while satisfying a given tolerance σ,

∥A − QQ T A∥2 ≤ σ. (3) The Adaptive Randomized Range Finder (Algorithm 4.2 in [5]) constructs the basis vectors successively until a probabilistic stopping criterion indicates that the desired approximation ac-curacy has been reached. The original formulation uses Gram– Schmidt orthogonalization of successively sampled vectors. A blocked variant of the Adaptive Randomized Range Finder is presented in [6] and given in Algorithm 1. The array A is updated in place to represent the residual 

Aorig − QB . Its norm can therefore be used as a deterministic stopping criterion. In addition to the subspace basis Q, the projected matrix B = QT Aorig is computed. Another stopping criterion is devised in [7] based on the Frobenius norm of the residual matrix ∥A−QB ∥F . This norm can be computed from the norms of the generated panels of 

Algorithm 1 Block randomized range finder [6] 

Require: A matrix A ∈ Rm×n, a tolerance σ ∈ R, σ > 0,and a block size b ∈ N+. 

> 1:

while ∥A∥2 ≥ σ do  

> 2:

Fill Ω ∈ Rn×b with values from a standard Gaussian distribution.  

> 3:

Qnew , ← orth (AΩ)  

> 4:

Qnew , ← orth (( I − QQ T )Qnew ) ▷ reorth.  

> 5:

Q ← Q Qnew 

 

> 6:

Bnew = QTnew A 

> 7:

B ←

 BBnew 

 

> 8:

A ← A − Qnew Bnew  

> 9:

end while Ensure: Q fulfilling (3). 

B. For sparse matrices in particular, this is important because explicitly forming the residual matrix can lead to fill-in. The authors further develop the algorithm to reduce the number of passes over A.The surveyed blocked algorithms orthogonalize sampled panels through some form of Gram–Schmidt and rely on explicit reorthogonalization to keep the accumulated basis sufficiently orthogonal, particularly in ill-conditioned regimes. To efficiently use BLAS level-3 routines and achieve the high arithmetic intensity needed to saturate GPUs, a blocked Gram–Schmidt method is required. Such blocking improves computational efficiency but does not provide unconditional numerical stability [12]. Recent work on reorthogonalized Pythagorean variants of BCGS has shown that strong orthog-onality guarantees can be retained while reducing synchro-nization requirements [13]. These developments make BCGS an important alternative to serve as a basis for an adaptive randomized range finder. Householder QR is a standard method for orthogonalization and is implemented in numerical linear algebra libraries such as LAPACK. It avoids the need for explicit reorthogonalization and provides strong bounds on the error in the computed or-thogonal factor [8]. Using the compact WY representation [9], most of the blocked factorization can be expressed in terms of level-3 BLAS operations. Blocked Householder QR [10] is moreover a mature compu-tational primitive. GPU implementations are available in which CPU panel factorization is overlapped with GPU updates and communication [11]. These properties make blocked House-holder QR a natural starting point for developing a Gram– Schmidt-free adaptive randomized range finder. III. A R ECURSIVE QB FACTORIZATION BASED ON 

HOUSEHOLDER QR The goal of this section is to derive an algorithm that implicitly performs a classic blocked QR factorization 

AΩ = QR, 

where Ω ∈ Rn×r is a Gaussian random matrix. Q should be given in factored form representation, similar to the geqrf LAPACK routine, where Q is represented by Householder vectors vi and scalars τi,We are not interested in R, but in the QB decomposition approximating A determined by Q,

A ≈ QB, Q ∈ Rm×r , B = QT A ∈ Rr×n. (4) However, r is not known a priori, as we aim to develop an adaptive randomized range finder. We aim to compute the Householder reflector representations successively, to check the subspace accuracy (3) at each step, and stop as soon as it reaches the desired tolerance. The compact WY representation [9] is used to represent block reflectors 

Qi = Im − ViTiV Ti , (5) where Vi ∈ Rm×b contains Householder vectors and Ti ∈

Rb×b is a triangular matrix. Q can be represented as a product of block reflectors Q = Q 

> i

Qi. Applying Q resolves into a series of matrix-matrix products. The key question to design a blocked adaptive range finder algorithm based on the Householder QR decomposition is the following: Given a block reflector from the QR decomposition of a sampled panel AΩ0, how can it be used to update A,such that that next block reflector can be computed from a QR decomposition of of the next sampled panel AΩ1. The following observation clarifies this issue. 

Theorem III.1. Let A ∈ Rm×n and Ω = Ω1 Ω2

 ∈ Rn×r ,where Ω1 contains the first b columns of Ω. Given the QR factorization 

Q1

R1

0



:= AΩ1,

the updated A

˜A =

 ˜A1

˜A2



:= QT 

> 1

A, (6) 

and the QR decomposition 

Q2R2 := ˜A2Ω2,

then 

Q := Q1

Ib

Q2



(7) 

is the orthogonal factor of a QR factorization of AΩ, i.e. 

QT AΩ = R is upper triangular. Proof. Simply substituting definitions yields 

QT AΩ = 

R1 ˜A1Ω1

0 R2



.

In factored form representation, the product of orthogonal reflectors (7) is not formed explicitly, but the Householder vec-tors and their corresponding scaling factors and/or triangular block factors Ti can just be concatenated in one list. Theorem III.1 provides a recipe to recursively perform the classic randomized range finder introduced in Section II. This variant, given in Figure 2, is free of Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization and rich in level-3 BLAS. 1) Sample a matrix panel Y = AΩ1.2) Factorize the panel Q1R1 = Y .3) Update A ← QT 

> 1

A, retrieve B1 as upper block-row. 4) Repeat for the lower part of A with a new random matrix. Fig. 2: Recursive QB factorization based on implicit House-holder QR factorization of AΩ.Similar to the standard blocked QR factorization, the height of the processed panel decreases with each iteration, as does the height of the matrix that needs to be updated. In contrast to the standard QR factorization, the width of the matrix that needs to be updated does not decrease. The upper part of the updated matrix, ˜A1 in Theorem III.1, is the upper part of B in the A = QB factorization. The blocked adaptive randomized range finder developed in the next section is based on the following intuition: When the norm of the lower part of the updated matrix ˜A2 is low enough, we have a low-rank approximation A ≈ Q1B1, with B1 = ˜A1.The computed row panels of B can be used to provide a cheap deterministic error criterion based on their Frobenius norms as proposed in [7] for an algorithm based on Gram– Schmidt orthogonalization. Theorem 3.1 in [7] states that for an orthogonal matrix Q

and B = QT A = BT 

> 1

· · · BTj

T we have 

∥A − QB ∥2 

> F

= ∥A∥2 

> F

− ∥ B∥2 

> F

= ∥A∥2 

> F

−

> j

X

> i=1

∥Bi∥2 

> F

.

We initialize a scalar E = ∥A∥2 

> F

and subtract each squared panel norm ∥Bi∥2 

> F

, until σ2 is reached. This ensures that (3) holds in the Frobenius norm. The Frobenius norm is easy to compute and popular in machine learning applications. An alternative approach for the spectral norm is more labour-intensive and checks the residual ∥A − QB ∥2, given by the spectral norm of the remaining lower part of B.In contrast to the standard QR factorization, it is not possible to store all algorithm matrix outputs in place of A, because B

is not upper triangular. During the process, outlined in Figure 2, building up B in place of A is the natural approach. The Householder vectors need to be stored in an extra array. IV. T HE HOUSEHOLDER BLOCKED ADAPTIVE 

RANDOMIZED RANGE FINDER 

We divide A into blocks, store Householder vectors in 

V , which is lower triangular with ones on the diagonal. Block rows of B are computed successively and stored in the memory location of A. Each storage-efficient factorization [9] of a sampled block column yields an upper triangular matrix block, all of which are stored in T .As a notation for referring to blocks, block rows and block columns we use 

A =



A0,0 · · · A0,k 

... . . . ...

Aj, 0 · · · Aj,k 

 , V =



V0,0 · · · V0,k 

... . . . ...

Vj, 0 · · · Vj,k 

 ,B =

 | B0

> |

...

> |

Bj

> |

 , T = T0 · · · Tk, .

We use colon notation to refer to a submatrix of a matrix M

as Mi:l,p :q . The orthogonal subspace basis in (4) is represented as Q = Qki=0 (I − V0: j,i TiV T

> 0: j,i

).

Algorithm 2 Householder Blocked Adaptive Randomized Range Finder 

Require: A matrix A ∈ Rm×n, a tolerance σ, and a block size b. 

> 1:

E ← ∥ A∥2 

> F
> 2:

B ← A 

> 3:

Initialize V with all zeros.  

> 4:

i ← 0 

> 5:

while E > σ 2 do  

> 6:

Fill Ω ∈ Rn×b with values from a standard Gaussian distribution.  

> 7:

(Vi:j,i , T i) ← qr (Bi:j, Ω) ▷ geqrt  

> 8:

Bi:j ← (I − Vi:j,i TiV Ti:j,i )Bi:j 

> 9:

E ← E − ∥ Bi∥2 

> F
> 10:

i ← i + 1  

> 11:

end while  

> 12:

V ← V:,0: i−1 

> 13:

B ← B0: i−1,: 

> 14:

r ← i · b

Ensure: Rank r, Householder vectors V ∈ Rm×r , B ∈ Rr×n,

T0, . . . , T i−1 ∈ Rb×b such that ∥A − QB ∥F ≤ σ, where 

Q = Qi−1 

> l=0

(Im − V0: j,l TlV T

> 0: j,l

).For simpler notation we assume the matrix dimensions to be divisible by the block size b, and assume all blocks to have dimensions b × b. Algorithm 2 successively creates the block columns of V and block rows of B. Step 7 performs a QR decomposition of a sampled panel, resulting in a compact WY representation (5), as given by LAPACK routine geqrt . After 

min ( j + 1 , k + 1) steps, E is numerically zero and the loop is guaranteed to end. In case of j > k , the last j − k block rows of B are zero. If the stopping criterion E ≤ σ2 is met before all j + 1 block rows of B or all k + 1 block columns of 

V have been computed, B, V and T are truncated resulting in a low rank decomposition. V. H YBRID CPU–GPU I MPLEMENTATION 

Our goal is to develop a hybrid CPU–GPU implemen-tation of Algorithm 2 that keeps the GPU saturated with high-arithmetic-intensity BLAS-3 operations. Following estab-lished approaches for dense linear algebra solvers in hybrid  

> Sample Panel 0 Factor Panel 0 Update B
> Sample Panel 1 Factor Panel 1

...

(a) Sequential implementa-tion. Sample Panel 0 Sample Panel 1 Factor Panel 0 Update B Update Panel 1 Sample Panel 2 Factor Panel 1 Update B Update Panel 2 

... ... 

> Queue 0 Queue 1

(b) Exposed parallelism by in-troduced panel update. 

Fig. 3: Task-dependency graphs for two implementations of Algorithm 2. Arrows denote data dependencies. In the se-quential implementation (a), the next panel cannot be sampled until the full update of B is complete. In the overlapped im-plementation (b), the sampled panel is updated independently, introducing extra operations while shortening the critical path. CPU–GPU environments [14], we aim to perform the largely sequential panel factorization on the CPU while overlapping it with the update step on the GPU. In classical Householder QR, this overlap arises naturally by partitioning the trailing update into two parts: the update of the next panel and the update of the remaining matrix. Since only the next panel must be updated before the subsequent panel factorization can begin, the CPU can proceed with that factorization while the GPU completes the larger update of the remainder. In the case of the proposed blocked adaptive randomized range finder, Algorithm 2, this is not possible in a straight-forward way, as the whole updated matrix B is needed to compute the next sampled panel. However, if we accept a penalty in the operations count, this allows us to shorten the critical path. Instead of waiting for all of B to update (step 8), we can compute a sampled column BΩ and update it independently. With this redundancy in place, the panel update and factorization on the one side happen independently of the matrix update and panel sampling on the other side. Figure 3 shows the dependency graph of operations in both variants. All operations except for the panel factorizations are suitable to run on the GPU as they are essentially matrix-matrix multiplications. Ideally, sampling a panel and updating B

take as long as factoring and updating a panel. Experiments presented in Section VI vary the block size and show the performance impact. We assume that all input matrices are available on the GPU, as this reflects the circumstances in our motivating example from deep learning, where weights and gradients reside on the GPU during the training of neural networks. We implement Algorithm 2 with exposed parallelism (see Fig. 3b) using the MAGMA software library [11]. As the algorithm shows structural commonalities with the standard Householder QR decomposition, the MAGMA routine sgeqrf3_gpu has served as a basis for implementation. In order to achieve CPU-GPU overlap, a non-blocking computation of the squared Frobenius norm had to be devised. VI. N UMERICAL STABILITY AND PERFORMANCE 

First, we perform experiments to assess approximation qual-ity and numerical stability of our proposed Householder (HH) approach (Algorithm 2) and compare it to Block Classical Gram Schmidt (BCGS) based range finders (Algorithm 1 from [6]), where a QR decomposition is used as inner block orthogonalization. One variant performs reorthogonalization (Step 4 in Algorithm 1) For these experiments, the algorithms were implemented in Python. A 1024 × 1024 test matrix is constructed with prescribed singular values decaying logarithmically from 10 0 to 10 −14 

with random orthogonal left and right singular vectors. All methods used a block size of b = 64 and perform calculations in single precision. After every block, we measure the spectral-norm projection residual ∥A − QQ T A∥2, where Q contains all computed basis vectors in explicit form up to that point. The stopping quantities tracked by the respective methods are reported in the same figure. For the BCGS method, this refers to the 2-norm of the residual A − QB that is tracked in place of A (Step 8 in Algorithm 1). For the Householder variant, this refers to the Frobenius norm of the residual tracked in the scalar √E at step 9 in Algorithm 2. The loss of orthogonality 

∥QT Q − I∥2 is also reported. All results are found in Fig. 4. We see in Fig. 4 that initially the residual goes down for all proposed methods as more basis vectors are added. Without reorthogonalization, the orthogonality for the BCGS variant starts to deteriorate immediately, and soon this is reflected in the residual ∥A−QQ T A∥2. The stopping criterion, tracking ∥A − QB ∥2 stays low, as B absorbs Q’s defects. Reorthogonalization remedies these issues. Both reorthogonalized BCGS and Householder residuals ap-proach the noise floor introduced by single precision. The pre-scribed singular values go below machine precision, making the resulting matrix numerically low-rank. The computable, actual singular values of rounded A are given as black dotted line, and represent the best approximation possible by the given number of basis vectors. Even with reorthogonalization, BCGS accuracy deteriorates near the end, as no meaningful information is incorporated anymore. The tracked stopping criterion fails to capture this. An adaptive range finder should stop before this point. Our Householder variant does not have this problem and yields a low residual, and preserves orthogonality, even under these extreme circumstances, with no need for reorthogonalization. However, it turns out that the stopping quantity based on the Frobenius norm of the panels is of limited use. At k = 384 , it does not accurately track the residual anymore due to cancellation. It becomes negative and is capped to zero, which is not represented in the figure’s logarithmic scale. Whether this can be fixed on the implementation side or another stopping criterion based on the spectral norm of the lower part of B is needed, remains as future work. We next evaluate the runtime performance of the proposed algorithm and implementation in the experiments reported in Figs. 5, 6, and 7. In these experiments we generate random square matrices and run the adaptive range finder to comple-tion, i.e., until a full basis has been computed. Runtimes were measured on a GH200 node of the JURECA-DC Evaluation Platform 1, containing NVIDIA’s Grace Hopper Superchip. The Grace CPU has 72 ARM cores and the GPU is a tightly coupled Hopper GPU. The node contains 480 GiB LPDDR5X and 96 GiB HBM3 memory. The NVPL library was used for all CPU-based LAPACK and BLAS calls. All experiments were performed in single precision. When we refer to ”GPU versions” or similar, we mean CPU-GPU hybrid versions, as panel factorization happens on the CPU. For Figs. 5 and 6, the mean runtime of 5 runs after a warmup round is reported. For Fig. 7, the mean of 3 runs after warmup is reported. Fig. 5 shows a heat map of runtimes achieved by variants of our proposed Algorithm 2, with varying matrix size m = n

and block size b. The first heat map refers to a CPU-only variant, where panel factorization and matrix update are not overlapped. The center heat map shows runtime results for a GPU accelerated variant of Algorithm 2, where the random matrix generation, the GEMM to sample the panel, the matrix update (Step 8), and the computation of ∥Bi∥2 

> F

are realized on the GPU, using CuRAND and MAGMA, with a cuBLAS backend. No extra panel update has been introduced so that CPU and GPU work are not overlapped (see Fig. 3a). The third heat map shows the performance of the two-queue variant (see Fig. 3b), which introduces additional operations to enable overlap between CPU and GPU work. Both GPU-accelerated variants assume that the input matrix resides in GPU memory and leave the output there. This setup reflects our motivating machine-learning use case, in which the relevant matrices remain on the accelerator throughout the computation. Fig. 5 shows that the GPU implementations substantially outperform the CPU implementation, with the advantage increasing with matrix size. For small matrices, the one-and two-queue variants perform similarly, and the additional overlap provides little benefit. For larger matrices, however, the two-queue implementation becomes clearly advantageous, reducing the runtime for the largest case from 9.91 s on the CPU and 0.728 s with one GPU queue to 0.407 s . This indi-cates that the additional parallelism exposed by overlapping panel processing with the matrix update becomes increasingly effective as the problem size grows. A GPU-accelerated implementation of Algorithm 1 is avail-able as part of RSVDpack [6], [15]. We forked and adapted                               

> 1https://apps.fz-juelich.de/jsc/hps/jureca/evaluation-platform-overview. html#grace-hopper-nodes – accessed 2026/08/08. 128 256 384 512 640 768 896 1024 10 −12
> 10 −10
> 10 −8
> 10 −6
> 10 −4
> 10 −2
> 10 0
> Residual
> εFP32
> (a) Residual and stopping quantities
> BCGS Range Finder: ‖ A−QQ TA‖2
> BCGS Range Finder: ‖ A−QB ‖2
> BCGS Range Finder + Reorth.: ‖ A−QQ TA‖2
> BCGS Range Finder + Reorth.: ‖ A−QB ‖2
> HH Range Finder: ‖ A−QB ‖2
> HH Range Finder: (‖ A‖2
> F− Σ i‖Bi‖2
> F)12
> Actual σk+ 1 (A)Prescribed σk+ 1 (A)
> 128 256 384 512 640 768 896 1024 10 −7
> 10 −6
> 10 −5
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> ‖QTQ − I‖2
> εFP32
> (b) Loss of orthogonality
> BCGS Range Finder BCGS Range Finder + Reorth. HH Range Finder
> Number of acquired basis vectors k

Fig. 4: Residual and stopping quantities (a) and loss of orthogonality (b) for BCGS range finder (Algorithm 1) with and without reorthogonalization, and the proposed Householder-based method (HH range finder, Algorithm 2). The actual and prescribed values of σk+1 (A) are included as reference bounds, and the horizontal dotted line marks FP32 unit roundoff. the publicly available code 2 to run on the GH200 system and to enable a meaningful comparison with the experiments in Fig. 5. In addition to modifications to the test routines, we replaced the explicit MKL dependency with NVPL and changed the GPU-accelerated implementation from double to single precision. Fig. 6 shows results for the RSVDpack implementation of Algorithm 1 using the same matrix sizes and block sizes as in Fig. 5. Its GPU-accelerated version is only about twice as fast as the CPU version, and both are substantially slower than the corresponding variants of our proposed Householder-based adaptive range finder, Algorithm 2. For m = n = 16384 ,our GPU-accelerated implementation achieves a speedup of up to 56 × over the RSVDpack implementation. Unlike our implementation, RSVDpack takes its input from host memory and returns its output there; the reported runtimes therefore include host–device and device–host transfers. The experiment reported in Fig. 7 compares the perfor-mance of our proposed adaptive range finder, Algorithm 2, with a simple fixed-rank randomized range finder as out-lined in Fig. 1. We implemented three variants of the fixed-rank method, each consisting of random matrix generation, a matrix multiplication to form the sampled range, and a QR factorization. To obtain the same QB output as our proposed method, we additionally compute B = QT A by applying the resulting Householder reflectors to A. The CPU  

> 2https://github.com/sergeyvoronin/LowRankMatrixDecompositionCodes –accessed 2026/08/08

implementation uses LAPACK and BLAS routines provided by NVPL, while the two GPU implementations use either MAGMA or cuBLAS together with cuSOLVER. For fixed matrix dimensions m = n = 16 384 and block size b = 128 ,we vary the target rank r, i.e., the number of basis vectors to be computed. For a direct runtime comparison, Algorithm 2 is run in a fixed-rank mode: instead of terminating when the prescribed approximation tolerance is reached, it stops after computing r basis vectors. The main advantage of the adaptive range finder is that it determines the required rank from a prescribed approximation tolerance. In contrast, a fixed-rank method may compute substantially more basis vectors than necessary to achieve the same accuracy, providing a source of potential runtime savings for the adaptive approach. However, Fig. 7 shows that, even when this advantage is removed by computing the same number of basis vectors, our proposed method outperforms all fixed-rank variants for large matrices. We attribute this performance advantage to the interleaving of operations in the proposed algorithm. In the fixed-rank implementations, the sampling, QR factorization, and computation of B = QT A

are performed as separate sequential stages, whereas in our method these operations are integrated into the blocked iter-ation. This structure enables more effective utilization of the GPU. For small target ranks ( r = 128 and 256 ), the fixed-rank range finder using cuSOLVER achieves the best performance. In this regime, Algorithm 2 is dominated by the CPU panel factorization and by the comparatively inefficient construction 64 128 256 1024 2048 4096 16384         

> 0.0217 0.021 0.021 0.0985 0.0813 0.0774 0.556 0.392 0.335 21.7 13.8 9.91

(a) CPU           

> 64 128 256
> 0.00645 0.0076 0.00863 0.0155 0.0168 0.0188 0.0432 0.0448 0.0502 0.758 0.728 0.735

(b) GPU—one queue           

> 64 128 256
> 0.00745 0.0087 0.00957 0.0157 0.0171 0.0205 0.0372 0.0397 0.0457 0.476 0.422 0.407

(c) GPU—two queues 

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Median runtime (s, log scale)

Block size Matrix size Fig. 5: Measured runtimes for full runs of the Householder blocked adaptive range finder (Algorithm 2) on a GH200. 64 128 256 1024 2048 4096 16384                   

> 0.0707 0.123 0.084 0.376 0.539 0.385 2.35 2.49 1.81 87.1 66.1 44.9
> (a) RSVDpack, CPU
> 64 128 256
> 0.0728 0.131 0.0934 0.312 0.498 0.35 1.29 1.84 1.34 26.7 31.8 22.9
> (b) RSVDpack, GPU
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Median runtime (s, log scale)
> Block size Matrix size

Fig. 6: Measured runtimes for computing the QB factorization in RSVDpack [15] on a GH200, including host-device and device-host transfers. of the T matrix. The MAGMA-based fixed-rank implementa-tion exhibits a different and initially counterintuitive trend: its runtime decreases as the target rank increases. This behavior results from a particularity of MAGMA’s QR routines. During the sgeqrf factorization, MAGMA does not construct a T

matrix for the final panel, since the corresponding House-holder block reflector is not needed for a trailing-matrix update. Consequently, when this reflector is subsequently applied by sormqr , the T matrix required for a GPU-based 

magma_slarfb operation is unavailable, and the application falls back to a CPU-based LAPACK routine. For a large matrix and a small target rank, the final panel represents a substantial fraction of the factorization, causing this CPU operation to dominate the runtime and leaving the GPU underutilized. As the target rank increases, the relative cost of this final CPU-based application decreases, explaining the observed reduction in runtime. 1024 2048 3072 4096 5120 6144 7168 8192 9216 10240 11264 12288 13312 14336 15360 16384 

Number of acquired basis vectors 

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean runtime (s)

Householder range finder runtime, M = N = 16 384 

> Non-adaptive, NVPL (CPU) Non-adaptive, MAGMA (GPU) Non-adaptive, cuSOLVER (GPU) Adaptive (MAGMA, GPU), proposed

Fig. 7: Runtimes of non-adaptive randomized range finder variants, compared to adaptive range finder with set number of basis vectors, a block size of b = 128 on a GH200. VII. T OWARDS EFFICIENT LOW -R ANK DEEP LEARNING 

Methods from randomized numerical linear algebra show promise as viable tool in the context of resource-efficient low-rank deep learning. In the training of a deep neural network, each layer is represented by matrices, including weights, gradients, and optimizer states. The weights are updated using gradients computed by backpropagation, typically along with optimizer states, e.g., in the popular Adam optimizer. These states encode moving averages of the gradient’s first and second moments, incorporating past iteration data to guide updates more effectively. GaLore reduces optimizer-state memory by representing these states in a low-rank dominant subspace of the gradient matrix [1]. While GaLore treats the rank r as a hyperparam-eter, typically chosen heuristically, our adaptive range finder instead allows the approximation tolerance σ in (3) to serve as the hyperparameter, determining a suitable rank automatically. With an adaptive method, the dimensionality of subspaces across consecutive training steps can vary. This highlights the problem, that adding optimizer states, represented in different subspaces, is not very meaningful and can lead to deteriorated performance, even when the rank is fixed. A linear transforma-tion can be applied to ensure subspace consistency. To realize this, a low-rank optimizer state Mt ∈ Rrt×n at step t + 1 

is substituted by QTt+1 QtMt, where Qt contains the subspace basis of the previous step and Qt+1 contains the current one. VIII. C ONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 

We presented a Householder-based blocked adaptive ran-domized range finder that avoids explicit reorthogonalization and maps efficiently to hybrid CPU–GPU execution. On the GH200, the two-queue implementation reduced the runtime of the largest tested case from 9.91 s on the CPU to 0.407 s ,demonstrating the benefit of overlapping CPU panel factoriza-tion with GPU-based matrix updates. An important remaining issue is the stopping criterion. The Frobenius-norm criterion based on successively subtracting the norms of computed panels is inexpensive, but our experiments show that it can lose accuracy through cancellation near the numerical noise floor. Future work should investigate more robust implementations of this criterion as well as alternative stopping criteria, for example based on estimating the spectral norm of the remaining part of the transformed matrix. Power iterations could additionally be incorporated to improve the approximation of dominant subspaces for matrices with slowly decaying singular values. There is also scope for further algorithmic and implementation-level optimization. Operations such as the matrix update and residual-norm computation could potentially be fused, while an implementation based on cuSOLVER could reduce software dependencies and aportable programming model such as Kokkos could facilitate targeting other accelerator architectures. If the projected matrix B is not required, updating its completed block rows may be unnecessary. This case also motivates variants that leave A unchanged and instead build up T to provide a compact WY representation of the computed basis. This representation can be used to apply accumulated transformations to newly sampled panels [16]. A detailed operation and data-movement analysis would be needed to determine when such variants are advantageous. Applying the proposed method in low-rank deep-learning frameworks such as GaLore will require extensions to dis-tributed matrix layouts arising from fully sharded data paral-lelism and model parallelism. Recent developments in reorthogonalized block Gram– Schmidt methods make them a promising alternative to revisit for adaptive randomized range finders [13], in particular in distributed settings. Overall, the results demonstrate the potential of the pro-posed Householder-based formulation as a numerically robust and efficient GPU-oriented approach to adaptive low-rank matrix approximation. REFERENCES [1] J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, B. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Anandkumar, and Y. Tian, “GaLore: Memory-efficient LLM training by gradient low-rank projec-tion,” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 235. PMLR, 2024, pp. 61 121–61 143. [2] C. Gr¨ aßle, M. Hinze, and S. Volkwein, “Model order reduction by proper orthogonal decomposition,” in Model Order Reduction, Volume 2: Snapshot-Based Methods and Algorithms , P. Benner, S. Grivet-Talocia, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, W. Schilders, and L. M. Silveira, Eds. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter, 2021, pp. 47–96. [3] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations , 4th ed. Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013. [4] R. Murray, J. Demmel, M. W. Mahoney, N. B. Erichson, M. Mel-nichenko, O. A. Malik, L. Grigori, P. Luszczek, M. Derezi´ nski, M. E. Lopes, T. Liang, H. Luo, and J. Dongarra, “Randomized numerical linear algebra: A perspective on the field with an eye to software,” 2023. [5] N. Halko, P.-G. Martinsson, and J. A. Tropp, “Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic algorithms for constructing approximate ma-trix decompositions,” SIAM Review , vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 217–288, 2011. [6] P.-G. Martinsson and S. Voronin, “A randomized blocked algorithm for efficiently computing rank-revealing factorizations of matrices,” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. S485–S507, 2016. [7] W. Yu, Y. Gu, and Y. Li, “Efficient randomized algorithms for the fixed-precision low-rank matrix approximation,” SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1339–1359, 2018. [8] N. J. Higham, Accuracy and Stability of Numerical Algorithms , 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2002. [9] R. Schreiber and C. Van Loan, “A storage-efficient WY representation for products of householder transformations,” SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical Computing , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 53–57, 1989. [10] E. Elmroth and F. G. Gustavson, “Applying recursion to serial and parallel QR factorization leads to better performance,” IBM Journal of Research and Development , vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 605–624, 2000. [11] S. Tomov, J. Dongarra, and M. Baboulin, “Towards dense linear algebra for hybrid GPU accelerated manycore systems,” Parallel Computing ,vol. 36, no. 5–6, pp. 232–240, 2010. [12] E. Carson, K. Lund, M. Rozloˇ zn´ ık, and S. Thomas, “Block Gram-Schmidt algorithms and their stability properties,” Linear Algebra and its Applications , vol. 638, pp. 150–195, 2022. [13] E. Carson, K. Lund, Y. Ma, and E. Oktay, “Reorthogonalized Pythagorean variants of block classical Gram–Schmidt,” SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications , vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 310–340, 2025. [14] S. Tomov, R. Nath, H. Ltaief, and J. Dongarra, “Dense linear algebra solvers for multicore with GPU accelerators,” in 2010 IEEE Interna-tional Symposium on Parallel & Distributed Processing, Workshops and PhD Forum (IPDPSW) , 2010, pp. 1–8. [15] S. Voronin and P.-G. Martinsson, “RSVDPACK: An implementation of randomized algorithms for computing the singular value, interpolative, and CUR decompositions of matrices on multi-core and GPU architec-tures,” 2015. [16] P. Benner, M. K¨ ohler, and C. Penke, “GPU-accelerated and storage-efficient implementation of the QR decomposition,” in Parallel Com-puting is Everywhere , ser. Advances in Parallel Computing, vol. 32. IOS Press, 2018, pp. 329–338.