Title: DEEP-GAP: Deep-learning Evaluation of Execution Parallelism in GPU Architectural Performance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14552v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:30:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# DEEP-GAP: Deep-learning Evaluation of Execution Parallelism in GPU Architectural Performance 

Kathiravan Palaniappan 

Independent Researcher (University of Colorado Colorado Springs Alumni) 

kpalania@uccs.edu 

Abstract —Modern datacenters increasingly rely on low-power, single-slot inference accelerators to balance performance, energy efficiency, and rack density constraints. The NVIDIA T4 GPU has become one of the most widely deployed inference accelerators in production environments due to its favorable performance-per-watt characteristics, mature software ecosystem, and cost efficiency [16]. Its architectural successor, the NVIDIA L4 GPU, introduces significant advancements, including enhanced Tensor Core throughput, expanded cache capacity, higher memory bandwidth, and improved parallel execution capability [15], [17]. However, limited empirical evidence exists quantifying the real-world inference performance gap between these two generations under controlled and reproducible conditions [18]. In this work, we introduce DEEP-GAP, a systematic bench-marking study that extends the GDEV-AI [28] methodology to GPU-based inference, directly evaluating the performance gap between the widely deployed T4 GPU and the more recent L4 GPU across multiple precision modes (FP32, FP16, INT8). Using identical model configurations, workload parameters, and measurement methodology, we evaluate inference performance for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101 using both PyTorch eager execution and TensorRT optimization pipelines [11], [12]. Results show that reduced precision significantly enhances in-ference performance, with INT8 achieving up to 58× throughput improvement over CPU baselines. L4 achieves up to 4.4× higher throughput than T4 while reaching peak efficiency at smaller batch sizes (B=16–32), thereby improving latency–throughput tradeoff characteristics for latency-sensitive workloads. This is consistent with well-established system-level tradeoffs between response time and processing efficiency [26]. However, T4 remains competitive for large-batch, throughput-oriented workloads and environments where cost efficiency, power constraints, or existing deployment compatibility are primary considerations. By maintaining methodological continuity with previous CPU benchmarking, DEEP-GAP establishes a controlled empirical ba-sis for understanding the transition from CPU-bound inference to contemporary GPU acceleration. Our findings provide practical guidance for selecting precision modes, batch sizes, and acceler-ator generations in accordance with workload requirements and deployment constraints. 

Index Terms —GPU inference, Performance benchmarking, Datacenter acceleration, Tensor Cores, Precision scaling (FP32, FP16, INT8), TensorRT, PyTorch, Latency–throughput tradeoff, Tail latency (p99), ResNet, T4 GPU, L4 GPU 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The rapid growth of machine learning inference workloads in production datacenters has increased the demand for ac-celerators capable of delivering high throughput under strict power and density constraints. Single-slot, low-power GPUs have emerged as attractive solutions for scalable inference deployment. 

Fig. 1: Evolution of NVIDIA datacenter GPUs across archi-tectural generations, highlighting inference-optimized acceler-ators (T4 and L4) within the broader compute-class roadmap. The figure contextualizes the GPUs evaluated in this study relative to contemporary training-oriented accelerators. While large language models (LLMs) dominate many cur-rent AI applications, we select ResNet architectures for this study due to their well-established, reproducible benchmark [3] for evaluating compute-bound convolutional workloads [1]. Compared to transformer-based models, which often intro-duce additional variability due to attention mechanisms and sequence-dependent computation [27], ResNet models provide a controlled setting for analyzing the impact of numerical precision and batch-level parallelism [2] on Tensor Core utilization. Deep neural networks have become the dominant approach for a wide range of applications, including computer vision and natural language processing [24]. This allows us to isolate architectural performance char-acteristics related to parallel execution efficiency, arithmetic throughput, and scaling behavior across precision modes. These factors are central to understanding the generational per-formance differences between Turing-based T4 GPUs [13] and Ada Lovelace–based L4 GPUs [15] in real-world datacenter inference deployments. While the majority of NVIDIA datacenter GPUs are de-signed to prioritize high-throughput training performance, the T4 and L4 stand out as purposefully inference-optimized accelerators. Their architectural characteristics and low TDP profiles reflect a design focus on efficient deployment rather than maximum compute density. The T4 GPU has been widely adopted due to its 70W power 

> arXiv:2604.14552v1 [cs.PF] 16 Apr 2026

envelope and compatibility with standard rack servers. The more recent L4 GPU introduces architectural enhancements [15] including improved Tensor Core throughput and increased memory bandwidth, promising performance improvements while preserving deployment flexibility. Despite these advancements, there remains a lack of con-trolled benchmarking studies that isolate the true performance gap between these two accelerators under identical runtime configurations. This paper aims to provide a rigorous, empir-ical comparison. 

A. Motivation: Inference-Centric Datacenter Demand 

Modern datacenter deployments increasingly rely on deep learning inference [6] to support real-time applications that demand predictable latency, high throughput, and efficient resource utilization. Selecting appropriate precision modes (FP32, FP16, INT8) and hardware platforms directly impacts system performance, cost efficiency, and scalability. Although recent GPU architectural advancements have pri-marily focused on training workloads, many production en-vironments require sustained inference performance under power and deployment constraints. Despite the widespread adoption of inference-optimized accelerators such as T4 and L4, publicly available empirical comparisons across precision modes remain limited. This work provides a systematic evaluation of inference performance across GPU generations and precision configu-rations, enabling clearer understanding of how architectural improvements translate into practical deployment benefits. Table I summarizes peak inference throughput for Granite Rapids CPU, NVIDIA T4, and NVIDIA L4 across FP32, FP16, and INT8 precision modes. Across all configurations, GPU-based inference significantly outperforms the CPU baseline in performance. Even at FP32 precision, GPUs demonstrate clear advantages due to higher parallelism. The NVIDIA T4 achieves up to 1.92 × speedup for ResNet-18 and 1.66 × for ResNet-50 compared to the CPU baseline. The use of reduced precision significantly increases throughput. With FP16 precision, the T4 achieves 3.83 ×

speedup for ResNet-18 and 3.69 × for ResNet-50. Further improvements are observed with INT8 TensorRT optimization, reaching 13.19 × and 22.03 × speedup respectively. The NVIDIA L4 demonstrates significantly stronger per-formance improvements over both the CPU and T4 across all precision modes. At FP32 precision, L4 achieves 5.20 ×

speedup for ResNet-18 and 4.64 × for ResNet-50. FP16 preci-sion further improves throughput, reaching 8.84 × and 8.38 ×

speedup. INT8 TensorRT produces the highest performance gains, with L4 achieving a 58.11 × speedup for ResNet-18 and a 58.21 × speedup for ResNet-50 relative to CPU execution. These results highlight the effectiveness of reduced precision inference and specialized Tensor Core hardware [7] in modern GPU architectures. 

Fig. 2: Benchmark execution structure. For each model (ResNet101, ResNet50, ResNet18), we perform a sweep over batch sizes under multiple precision modes (FP32, FP16, INT8), executing each configuration across repeated runs (R1– R3) to capture run-to-run variability. Collected metrics include median latency, P99 latency, throughput (images/sec), and GPU memory utilization (NVML). Overall, the results demonstrate a consistent trend: lower numerical precision enables significantly higher throughput, while newer GPU architectures further amplify these gains through improved parallel execution capability and memory subsystem efficiency. II. B ACKGROUND AND ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW 

A. Evolution of Inference-Oriented GPUs 

Modern GPU architectures have evolved significantly to improve deep learning performance, with enhancements in Tensor Core design, memory bandwidth, and cache hierarchy [14]. This study investigates how architectural evolution in inference-oriented GPUs translates into measurable perfor-mance gains under real-world deployment constraints. Specif-ically, we quantify the generational performance gap between NVIDIA T4 and L4 accelerators using controlled benchmark-ing across precision modes (FP32, FP16, INT8) and batch sizes. In contrast to training-oriented GPUs, which are optimized for peak throughput and multi-GPU scaling, inference accel-erators are designed for sustained performance-per-watt, rack-level compatibility, and deployment flexibility. These con-straints are critical in datacenter environments where power, cooling, and form factor limit hardware upgrades [6]. By focusing on low-profile, single-slot GPUs, this work isolates architectural improvements within a consistent deployment class, enabling a fair and practical comparison for real-world upgrade scenarios. 

1) T4 as Baseline Inference Accelerator: In this work, the T4 GPU serves as the baseline inference accelerator [13], representing widely deployed infrastructure across cloud and enterprise datacenters. Its 70W power envelope, single-slot low-profile design, and PCIe-based compatibility allow TABLE I: Peak Inference Throughput: Granite Rapids CPU vs NVIDIA T4 and L4 across Precisions. Speedup values for ResNet-101 are marked N/A because CPU experiments were not performed due to substantially higher computational cost and impractically long runtime on the Granite Rapids baseline configuration.                                                                  

> Platform Model Peak Batch (B) Peak Throughput (images/sec) Speedup vs CPU
> Granite Rapids (24 Threads) ResNet-18 8670 1.0 ×
> ResNet-50 8230 1.0 ×
> NVIDIA T4 (FP32) ResNet-18 384 1289 1.92 ×
> ResNet-50 256 382 1.66 ×
> ResNet-101 256 226 N/A NVIDIA T4 (FP16) ResNet-18 512 2569 3.83 ×
> ResNet-50 384 849 3.69 ×
> ResNet-101 384 512 N/A NVIDIA T4 (INT8 TensorRT) ResNet-18 512 8837 13.19 ×
> ResNet-50 384 5066 22.03 ×
> ResNet-101 256 3125 N/A NVIDIA L4 (FP32) ResNet-18 83483 5.20 ×
> ResNet-50 81068 4.64 ×
> ResNet-101 8687 N/A NVIDIA L4 (FP16) ResNet-18 16 5923 8.84 ×
> ResNet-50 81928 8.38 ×
> ResNet-101 16 1206 N/A NVIDIA L4 (INT8 TensorRT) ResNet-18 32 38 932 58.11 ×
> ResNet-50 32 13 388 58.21 ×
> ResNet-101 32 8026 N/A

seamless integration into existing 1U and 2U servers without specialized cooling or power requirements. Architecturally, T4 introduces Tensor Cores optimized for mixed-precision inference, supporting FP16 and INT8 accel-eration. These capabilities establish the baseline performance characteristics against which generational improvements are measured. In the DEEP-GAP analysis, T4 defines the lower bound of throughput and latency performance under identical system configurations. 

2) L4 as Generational Successor: The L4 GPU represents the next-generation accelerator within the same deployment class. While maintaining similar power and form factor con-straints, L4 introduces substantial architectural enhancements, including increased CUDA core counts, expanded L2 cache capacity, higher memory bandwidth, and improved Tensor Core throughput. In this study, L4 is evaluated as the target platform for generational comparison. We hypothesize that these architec-tural improvements will yield disproportionate performance gains under mixed-precision inference workloads, particularly at higher batch sizes. This hypothesis is evaluated through systematic benchmarking in Section V. 

3) Why Deployment-Constrained GPUs Matter: Datacenter operators must scale inference capacity within strict con-straints on rack density, power consumption, and cooling infrastructure. Large multi-slot GPUs often require specialized chassis and higher operational costs, limiting their adoption in existing deployments. This work focuses on low-profile, low-power GPUs that can be deployed incrementally within current infrastructure. By evaluating T4 and L4 within the same deployment constraints, DEEP-GAP provides insights into achievable performance gains without requiring major hardware redesigns. This per-spective is critical for practitioners making cost-performance trade-offs in production environments. 

B. Microarchitectural Differences 

L4 introduces architectural advancements over T4, including a higher CUDA core count, increased memory bandwidth, larger L2 cache, and enhanced Tensor Core performance. These changes are expected to improve throughput scaling and mixed-precision efficiency, particularly for FP16 and INT8 inference workloads. III. DEEP-GAP B ENCHMARKING FRAMEWORK 

To systematically evaluate GPU-based inference perfor-mance, we extend the GDEV-AI CPU benchmarking frame-work to a GPU-centric methodology that captures throughput, latency (including tail latency), and memory utilization under different numerical precision modes, as illustrated in Figure 2. Unlike CPU benchmarking, which primarily explores thread-level parallelism, GPU inference is driven by massive data parallelism, where batch size and precision play dominant roles in performance scaling. 

A. Benchmark Design 

We evaluate three precision modes commonly used in production inference: FP32 (full precision) using PyTorch CUDA execution, FP16 (half precision) using mixed-precision acceleration, and INT8 (quantized inference) using TensorRT-optimized execution. The benchmark is performed across multiple convolu-tional neural networks, including ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101. Deep neural networks exhibit varying levels of compute intensity and memory access patterns, which significantly influence hardware utilization and performance [4]. We systematically sweep across increasing batch sizes to identify peak throughput, saturation points, and latency-scaling characteristics, since batching plays a central role in GPU scheduling efficiency and parallel execution behavior [22]. 

B. Measurement Strategy 

Each experiment follows a structured execution pipeline consisting of warm-up iterations to stabilize GPU execution, followed by timed inference runs for latency measurement. Multiple repeats are performed to ensure statistical reliability, and NVML-based sampling is used to capture total GPU memory usage throughout execution. For each configuration, we record median latency, mean latency, standard deviation, and P99 latency [19] to capture both average and tail behavior. In addition, we measure throughput in images per second and track peak GPU memory usage using NVML. 

C. Benchmark Procedure 

The DEEP-GAP benchmarking procedure is designed to ensure fair, reproducible, and consistent evaluation across all configurations. Each experiment follows a standardized execu-tion pipeline that isolates GPU performance while minimizing external variability. For each combination of model, precision mode, and batch size, the model is first loaded onto the target device and configured for inference execution. Gradient computation is disabled to avoid unnecessary overhead. For GPU experiments, host-side parallelism is con-strained by fixing the PyTorch inter-op thread count to one (torch.set num interop threads(1)), ensuring that measured performance reflects GPU execution characteristics rather than variability introduced by CPU-side scheduling effects. For CPU experiments, thread counts are systematically varied across available cores to evaluate scaling behavior. Each configuration begins with a warm-up phase to sta-bilize execution by triggering kernel initialization, memory allocation, and cache population. Following warm-up, timed inference iterations are executed, during which latency and throughput metrics are recorded. Median latency and tail latency (p99) are computed to capture both typical and worst-case performance behavior. Batch sizes are systematically increased to evaluate scal-ing characteristics, allowing identification of saturation points where throughput plateaus or latency begins to degrade. This enables differentiation between compute-bound and memory-bound regimes for each architecture. INT8 inference is executed using TensorRT-optimized en-gines to reflect production deployment conditions. FP32 and FP16 experiments are executed using PyTorch CUDA eager 

Algorithm 1 DEEP-GAP GPU Inference Benchmark Proce-dure  

> 1:

Disable gradient computation  

> 2:

Set torch.set_num_interop_threads(1)  

> 3:

for precision ∈ { FP32 , FP16 , INT8-TensorRT } do  

> 4:

for model ∈ { ResNet101 , ResNet50 , ResNet18 } do  

> 5:

if precision == INT8-TensorRT then  

> 6:

Export model to ONNX format  

> 7:

Build TensorRT engine with optimization profile  

> 8:

Perform INT8 calibration and cache calibration data  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

for sweep = 1 to 10 do  

> 11:

for batch size ∈{1, 2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 , 64 , 128 , 256 , 384 , 512 } do  

> 12:

for repeat = 1 to 3 do  

> 13:

Allocate GPU input/output tensors  

> 14:

Run warm-up iterations  

> 15:

for iteration = 1 to 100 do  

> 16:

Execute inference  

> 17:

Record latency  

> 18:

Sample NVML total GPU memory usage  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

Compute median, mean, std, and P99 latency  

> 21:

Compute throughput (images/sec)  

> 22:

Track peak memory usage  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

end for  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

end for  

> 27:

end for 

mode, providing a consistent comparison across precision modes. All configurations are evaluated under identical system settings, with GPU memory usage monitored via NVML. 

D. Experimental Parameters 

To ensure reproducibility and statistical stability, all exper-iments are conducted using a fixed benchmarking protocol, aligning with established best practices for reproducible ma-chine learning experimentation [23]. The methodology follows the structured benchmarking framework introduced in GDEV-AI [28], extended here to GPU-based inference workloads. Each measurement includes an initial warm-up phase of 20 iterations to eliminate cold-start effects such as kernel initialization, cache population, and memory allocation over-head. Performance metrics are then collected over 100 timed iterations, providing stable estimates of steady-state inference latency and throughput. To account for runtime variability, each configuration is repeated 3 times, and the maximum observed resource usage (e.g., GPU memory utilization reported by NVML) is recorded across repeats. For each model and precision mode, batch sizes are sys-tematically swept across 10 configurations to evaluate perfor-mance scaling behavior under increasing workload intensity. This experimental design enables reliable estimation of median latency, tail latency (p99), and throughput, while minimizing measurement noise caused by transient system effects. 

E. Experimental Scope 

The DEEP-GAP study evaluates inference performance across multiple dimensions, including model complexity, nu-merical precision, and batch size scaling. Experiments are conducted using ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101 to represent increasing computational and memory demands. Each model is evaluated under FP32, FP16, and INT8 precision modes to capture the impact of reduced numerical precision on performance. Batch sizes are systematically varied to analyze scal-ing behavior, identifying compute-bound and memory-bound regimes for each architecture, as larger batch sizes typically improve hardware utilization by exposing greater parallel execution opportunities [21]. All experiments are performed under identical system configurations to isolate the effect of GPU microarchitectural differences between T4 and L4. 

F. Impact of Numerical Precision on Parallelism 

Modern GPUs exploit reduced numerical precision to im-prove computational throughput, as illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4. Lower precision formats require fewer bits to rep-resent each value, reducing memory bandwidth requirements and enabling more data elements to be processed in parallel. As shown in Figure 3, FP32 (32-bit) provides high nu-merical accuracy but incurs larger data movement and lower parallelism. FP16 (16-bit) reduces data size and improves throughput through Tensor Core acceleration [8], offering a balance between accuracy and performance. INT8 (8-bit) fur-ther compresses data representation [9], enabling significantly higher parallel execution and maximizing hardware utilization. Conceptually, as illustrated in Figure 4, lower precision allows more values to be packed into the same compute unit (e.g., conceptually increases the number of operations per cycle), thereby increasing the number of operations that can be executed per cycle [10]. As precision decreases, the data footprint becomes smaller, more values fit within the same hardware resources, and the number of operations per cycle increases. This creates a trade-off between numerical accuracy and performance, where FP32 offers fine-grained resolution, FP16 provides a balanced middle ground, and INT8 achieves the highest throughput at reduced precision. This relationship motivates the DEEP-GAP evaluation across all three precision modes, enabling us to quantify how reduced precision translates into real-world inference performance gains. The evaluation spans three orthogonal dimensions: three models [3] (ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101), three precision modes (FP32, FP16, and INT8 using TensorRT), and two GPU architectures (NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4). This results in 18 distinct configurations, each evaluated across multiple batch sizes and repeated runs to ensure statistical reliability. 

G. Key Differences from CPU Benchmarking 

Compared to the GDEV-AI CPU methodology, DEEP-GAP shifts from thread-level scaling to batch-driven parallelism, where performance is primarily governed by batch size rather than thread count. It introduces precision-aware execution, where FP32, FP16, and INT8 exhibit significantly different performance characteristics, and leverages hardware acceler-ation through CUDA cores and Tensor Cores. Additionally, INT8 execution utilizes TensorRT for optimized inference, and memory usage is measured at the system level using NVML rather than framework-level allocation. This methodology enables a controlled and reproducible comparison of inference efficiency across GPU architectures and precision modes. IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

To ensure reproducibility and isolate GPU architectural effects, all experiments were conducted under controlled and documented system configurations. The methodology follows the structured benchmarking framework introduced in GDEV-AI [28], extended here to GPU-based inference. To facili-tate transparency and independent verification of results, the complete benchmarking framework, experiment scripts are publicly available as an open-source repository [29]. 

A. Hardware Configuration 

All GPU experiments were conducted on the host platform previously characterized in GDEV-AI [28]. For DEEP-GAP, both T4 and L4 GPUs were deployed on the same Granite Rapids-based system shown in Table II to minimize host-side bottlenecks and ensure that measured per-formance differences reflect GPU architectural characteristics rather than CPU limitations. TABLE II: Host System Configuration           

> Component Specification
> CPU Intel Xeon 6 Performance (Granite Rapids), 24 cores / 48 threads Memory 32 GB DDR5-6400 Storage NVMe SSD Operating System Ubuntu 22.04 LTS GPU Driver / CUDA Fixed NVIDIA driver and CUDA toolkit across all experiments

1) PCIe Configuration: Both GPUs were installed in the same physical PCIe x16 slot to ensure consistent host plat-form characteristics. The T4 operated over PCIe Gen3, while the L4 utilized PCIe Gen4, consistent with their respective architectural specifications. Input tensors were allocated directly on the GPU prior to timing measurements, and performance metrics were collected Fig. 3: Effect of numerical precision on data representation and parallel execution. Lower precision reduces data size, enabling more parallel operations per compute unit. FP32 uses higher precision with larger data representation, while FP16 and INT8 progressively reduce precision and increase parallelism. 

Fig. 4: Compute efficiency across precision modes. Lower precision enables more computations per cycle due to reduced data width. FP32 performs one operation per cycle, FP16 increases throughput, and INT8 maximizes parallel execution using specialized hardware units. exclusively for model forward-pass execution. Host-to-device data transfer latency was therefore excluded from reported results. Under these conditions, inference performance is pri-marily determined by on-device compute throughput, memory hierarchy efficiency, and Tensor Core utilization, rather than PCIe bandwidth differences. While PCIe Gen4 provides higher theoretical transfer band-width than Gen3, its impact on measured performance is expected to be limited in this study due to the absence of runtime data transfers within the timed region. 

2) Thermal and Power Stability: To prevent performance variability due to thermal throttling, GPU temperature, clock frequency, and power draw were monitored throughout execu-tion. All reported measurements were collected after reaching steady-state thermal conditions. Power consumption was recorded using device telemetry via nvidia-smi , enabling evaluation of performance-per-watt across precision modes. To ensure measurement stability, GPU temperature, power draw, and utilization were monitored throughout execution us-ing NVML telemetry. Figure 5 shows thermal behavior across FP32, FP16, and INT8 precision modes for both NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4. Across all evaluated workloads, both GPUs reached stable steady-state operating conditions without evidence of sustained thermal throttling. This confirms that the reported throughput and latency measurements reflect architec-tural behavior and precision effects rather than temperature-induced performance degradation. 

B. Empirical Throughput vs Theoretical Peak Compute 

To contextualize the observed inference throughput, we compare empirical performance trends with the theoretical peak compute capability of the Turing-based NVIDIA T4 and Ada Lovelace–based NVIDIA L4 architectures. Table III summarizes peak theoretical compute throughput across precision modes. These values represent hardware up-per bounds assuming ideal compute saturation and full Tensor Core utilization. TABLE III: Theoretical Peak Compute Capability          

> GPU FP32 TFLOPS FP16 TFLOPS INT8 TOPS T4 (Turing) 8.1 65 130 L4 (Ada) 30.3 121 242

Real-world inference workloads typically achieve lower utilization due to memory bandwidth constraints, kernel launch overhead, synchronization cost, and non-arithmetic operations, consistent with Roofline-style performance limits that balance compute throughput and memory bandwidth [20]. Nevertheless, empirical results follow the same directional scaling trend as theoretical compute capability. The L4 demon-strates substantially higher throughput compared to T4 across all precision modes, consistent with its increased CUDA core count, expanded L2 cache capacity, higher memory bandwidth, and improved Tensor Core throughput. Additionally, L4 reaches peak throughput at smaller batch sizes compared to T4, indicating improved architectural effi-ciency in scheduling parallel workloads and maintaining high Tensor Core utilization even under latency-sensitive execution regimes. 

C. Performance per Watt Analysis 

Energy efficiency is a critical consideration for datacenter deployment, where power constraints directly influence rack density, cooling requirements, and operational cost. Using NVML telemetry, we compute performance per watt (PPW) as: 

P P W = T hroughput P ower (1) where Throughput denotes inference throughput (im-ages/sec) and Power denotes average power consumption (W). Average power consumption is measured during the same benchmark runs used to determine peak throughput for each model, precision mode, and GPU architecture. Results show that reduced numerical precision substan-tially improves energy efficiency. INT8 TensorRT execution (a) T4 FP32 (b) T4 FP16 (c) T4 INT8   

> (d) L4 FP32 (e) L4 FP16 (f) L4 INT8

Fig. 5: Thermal behavior, power consumption, and utilization across NVIDIA T4 (top row) and NVIDIA L4 (bottom row) during DEEP-GAP benchmark execution under FP32, FP16, and INT8 precision modes. Each subplot shows temperature (°C), power draw (W), and GPU utilization (%) over time for ResNet101, ResNet50, and ResNet18 workloads executed sequentially. Both GPUs reach stable steady-state operating conditions with no sustained evidence of thermal throttling. Observed temperature ranges remain consistent with expected datacenter operating envelopes ( 65–72°C), indicating that reported throughput and latency results primarily reflect architectural characteristics rather than temperature-induced performance variability. INT8 workloads show periodic utilization patterns due to TensorRT engine execution phases and batch-level scheduling behavior. achieves the highest performance per watt across both archi-tectures due to increased Tensor Core utilization and reduced data movement. Across all evaluated workloads, L4 demonstrates signifi-cantly higher performance per watt compared to T4 while operating within a similar power envelope. This improvement reflects architectural enhancements in Ada Lovelace, including improved Tensor Core throughput, higher memory bandwidth, and increased execution parallelism. L4 provides higher inference capacity per watt, making it well suited for power-constrained deployments. 

D. Benchmark Procedure Differences from CPU-Only Exper-iments 

The CPU-only methodology explored scaling across host thread counts and small batch sizes. In contrast, GPU infer-ence shifts the primary source of parallelism to device-side execution, making CPU thread scaling less relevant. Accordingly, GPU experiments use a fixed host thread configuration and instead focus on batch-size scaling to expose GPU utilization and saturation behavior. Batch sizes were swept across {1, 2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 , 64 , 128 , 256 , 384 , 512 } to eval-uate throughput scaling under increasing arithmetic intensity and kernel occupancy. Timing is collected using CUDA events with explicit synchronization to eliminate host-side measurement artifacts. Each configuration includes a warm-up phase to reach steady state, followed by repeated timed iterations to compute median and p99 latency. GPU memory usage is recorded using NVML to identify saturation points and out-of-memory boundaries. 

E. Software Stack 

All experiments were conducted under a fixed software environment to ensure consistency across configurations. 

1) Operating System: Benchmarking was performed on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS with background services minimized to reduce scheduling interference. 

2) NVIDIA Driver and CUDA Toolkit: A consistent NVIDIA driver version was used across both GPUs. CUDA Toolkit support was verified for compatibility with both Turing (T4) and Ada Lovelace (L4) [15], [17] architectures. Identical runtime libraries were used to avoid version-induced perfor-mance variation. 

3) PyTorch Runtime: FP32 and FP16 experiments were executed using PyTorch with CUDA acceleration. The same PyTorch version was used across both GPUs to ensure con-sistent operator implementations and kernel selection. 4) TensorRT Optimization: INT8 experiments were con-ducted using NVIDIA TensorRT to leverage optimized exe-cution, including kernel fusion and quantization-aware accel-eration. Engines were built separately for each GPU to enable architecture-specific optimization while maintaining identical model configurations. All runtime parameters, including precision modes and batch sizes, were programmatically controlled to ensure con-sistency across runs. 

F. Models Evaluated 

To maintain methodological continuity with GDEV-AI [28], this study evaluates three widely used convolutional neural network architectures: ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101. These models are selected to represent progressively increasing computational complexity and arithmetic intensity, enabling analysis of how architectural differences between T4 and L4 manifest under varying workload intensities. Collectively, these models span a range of compute char-acteristics from relatively lightweight inference workloads (ResNet-18) to high-intensity execution regimes (ResNet-101), providing a structured basis for evaluating throughput scaling, latency behavior, and Tensor Core utilization across GPU generations. All models are instantiated using standard implementations provided by the PyTorch Torchvision library [5]. 

1) ResNet-18: ResNet-18 represents a lightweight convo-lutional architecture with relatively low computational and memory requirements. It is well-suited for latency-sensitive inference scenarios and smaller batch sizes, where kernel launch overheads, memory access latency, and PCIe transfer costs can have a more pronounced impact on performance. In the context of DEEP-GAP, ResNet-18 is used to evaluate GPU behavior under lower compute intensity, helping identify scenarios where architectural improvements may be limited by underutilization of available compute resources. This provides insight into performance scaling in latency-bound regimes, as analyzed in Section V. 

2) ResNet-50: ResNet-50 is a deeper and more computa-tionally intensive architecture, with significantly higher param-eter count and arithmetic complexity compared to ResNet-18. It places greater demand on GPU compute units, memory bandwidth, and Tensor Core throughput. Within DEEP-GAP, ResNet-50 serves as a representative high-intensity workload, enabling evaluation of how architec-tural enhancements in L4 translate into measurable gains under sustained parallel execution. In particular, it allows analysis of scaling behavior at larger batch sizes, where workloads transition toward compute-bound or memory-bound regimes. Comparing ResNet-18 and ResNet-50 enables a structured analysis of how workload intensity influences the observed performance gap between T4 and L4, providing a more comprehensive understanding of generational improvements across different deployment scenarios. 

3) ResNet-101: ResNet-101 further increases model depth and computational complexity, representing a high-intensity inference workload. Its larger parameter count and deeper network structure significantly increase arithmetic demand and memory traffic, placing sustained pressure on GPU compute resources and memory hierarchy. In DEEP-GAP, ResNet-101 is used to evaluate performance under fully utilized execution conditions, where GPUs operate closer to their peak throughput limits. This model is particu-larly useful for exposing differences in memory bandwidth, cache efficiency, and Tensor Core utilization between T4 and L4. By including ResNet-101, the study captures behavior in high compute intensity regimes, where architectural improve-ments are expected to have the most pronounced impact. The resulting performance trends are analyzed in Section V-A, with particular focus on throughput saturation and latency stability. 

a) Discussion: Together, ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101 provide a structured evaluation across low, medium, and high workload intensities. This progression en-ables a comprehensive analysis of how workload characteris-tics influence the observed performance gap between T4 and L4, and how architectural improvements scale with increasing computational demand. 

4) Rationale for Model Selection: ResNet architectures are selected due to their widespread adoption in both research literature and production inference environments. Their con-sistent structure and extensive prior evaluation make them suitable baselines for architectural performance analysis and enable direct comparison with the CPU-based results reported in GDEV-AI [28]. The combination of ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101 spans a range of computational intensities, allowing evalu-ation of GPU performance across varying workload scales. Increasing network depth introduces higher arithmetic demand and memory traffic, enabling observation of how architectural differences between T4 and L4 manifest under progressively more demanding inference conditions. These models are primarily composed of convolutional operations, which are well suited to GPU execution and ben-efit from mixed-precision acceleration using FP16 and INT8 Tensor Core pathways. This makes them effective workloads for analyzing throughput scaling, latency characteristics, and precision-dependent performance behavior. All experiments are conducted in inference mode (model.eval() ) with gradient computation disabled, en-suring that measurements reflect forward-pass execution only. V. R ESULTS 

A. Throughput Scaling Across Batch Sizes 

We first analyze inference throughput scaling across in-creasing batch sizes for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101 across NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4 GPUs. Figure 6 shows throughput (images/sec) across FP32, FP16, and INT8 preci-sion modes. (a) ResNet18 (b) ResNet50 (c) ResNet101   

> (d) ResNet18 (e) ResNet50 (f) ResNet101

Fig. 6: Throughput scaling across batch sizes for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101. Top row shows NVIDIA T4 results, bottom row shows NVIDIA L4 results. INT8 achieves highest throughput due to reduced numerical precision and improved Tensor Core utilization. L4 demonstrates significantly higher throughput and improved scaling efficiency compared to T4. Across all models and architectures, throughput increases rapidly as batch size grows from 1 to 32, demonstrating the transition from underutilized execution to effective GPU par-allelism. Beyond moderate batch sizes, throughput begins to plateau, indicating saturation of available compute resources, memory bandwidth, or kernel execution efficiency. 

CPU baseline. On the Granite Rapids CPU platform (24 threads), peak throughput occurs at batch size B = 8,reaching 670 images/sec for ResNet18 and 230 images/sec for ResNet50. Throughput does not significantly improve beyond this point, suggesting early saturation due to limited data parallelism and memory bandwidth. 

T4 scaling behavior. On NVIDIA T4, FP32 throughput improves modestly over CPU baselines. ResNet18 reaches 1289 images/sec at B = 384 , providing a 1.92 × speedup over CPU. Similarly, ResNet50 reaches 382 images/sec at B = 256 

(1.66 × speedup). Reduced precision significantly increases throughput. Using FP16, ResNet18 achieves 2569 images/sec at B = 512 (3.83 ×

CPU speedup), while ResNet50 reaches 849 images/sec at 

B = 384 (3.69 × speedup). INT8 TensorRT demonstrates substantially higher effi-ciency. ResNet18 achieves 8837 images/sec at B = 512 ,representing a 13.19 × speedup relative to CPU. ResNet50 achieves 5066 images/sec at B = 384 (22.03 × speedup), while ResNet101 reaches 3125 images/sec at B = 256 .These results indicate that T4 benefits significantly from reduced precision, but requires relatively large batch sizes to fully utilize Tensor Core parallelism. 

L4 scaling behavior. NVIDIA L4 demonstrates substan-tially improved scaling efficiency compared to T4. Even at small batch sizes, L4 achieves strong performance gains. Using FP32 precision at B = 8 , ResNet18 achieves 3483 images/sec, representing a 5.20 × speedup over CPU and a 2.70 × improvement over T4 FP32 peak throughput. FP16 further increases throughput efficiency. ResNet18 achieves 5923 images/sec at B = 16 (8.84 × CPU speedup), while ResNet50 achieves 1928 images/sec at B = 8 (8.38 ×

speedup). INT8 TensorRT provides the highest throughput across all configurations. ResNet18 achieves 38,932 images/sec at 

B = 32 , corresponding to a 58.11 × speedup over CPU and approximately 4.4 × improvement over T4 INT8. ResNet50 achieves 13,388 images/sec at B = 32 (58.21 × speedup), while ResNet101 achieves 8026 images/sec at B = 32 .Several clear scaling patterns emerge from the experimental results. First, the NVIDIA T4 requires relatively larger batch sizes ( B ≥ 256 ) to reach peak throughput, indicating that its Tensor Core resources require higher levels of data parallelism to achieve full utilization. This behavior suggests that the T4 architecture benefits most in throughput-oriented scenarios where large batch sizes can be sustained. In contrast, the NVIDIA L4 achieves peak throughput at significantly smaller batch sizes ( B = 16 –32 ), demonstrating improved architectural efficiency and more effective utilization of parallel execution units. This indicates that the L4 archi-tecture is capable of reaching high compute efficiency even under moderate batching conditions, which is advantageous (a) T4 median latency comparison (b) L4 median latency comparison 

Fig. 7: Median latency comparison across ResNet models and precision modes. INT8 consistently achieves the lowest latency, followed by FP16 and FP32. Larger models (ResNet101) show higher latency due to increased computational complexity. L4 demonstrates significantly lower latency than T4 across all precision modes, highlighting architectural improvements in Tensor Core efficiency and memory bandwidth.     

> (a) ResNet18 (b) ResNet50 (c) ResNet101
> (d) ResNet18 (e) ResNet50 (f) ResNet101

Fig. 8: Median latency scaling across batch sizes for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101. Top row shows NVIDIA T4 results and bottom row shows NVIDIA L4 results. Latency increases with batch size due to larger workload processing per inference call. Reduced precision modes (FP16 and INT8) significantly reduce latency due to lower computational cost and improved Tensor Core utilization. L4 consistently demonstrates lower latency compared to T4 across all models. for latency-sensitive inference workloads. Across all evaluated models, INT8 precision consistently de-livers the highest throughput, highlighting the strong impact of reduced numerical precision on arithmetic intensity, memory bandwidth utilization, and Tensor Core efficiency. Reduced precision enables more operations to be executed per cycle, allowing both architectures to achieve substantially higher inference throughput compared to FP32 and FP16 modes. As model complexity increases, peak throughput decreases due to higher computational demand and increased memory movement requirements. For example, L4 INT8 throughput decreases from 38,932 images/sec for ResNet18 to 8,026 images/sec for ResNet101, reflecting the additional arithmetic workload and deeper network structure associated with larger models. Overall, the results demonstrate that batch size and nu-merical precision strongly influence GPU inference efficiency. Modern architectures such as L4 achieve high throughput at smaller batch sizes, making them well suited for latency-sensitive datacenter workloads where very large batching levels may not be practical. B. Latency Results 

Figure 8 shows median latency scaling across batch sizes for both NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4 GPUs across FP32, FP16, and INT8 precision modes. Across all models, latency increases approximately linearly with batch size, reflecting the increased computational work-load required to process larger input batches. This behavior is expected because GPU kernels process more data per infer-ence call, increasing execution time even though throughput improves. 

T4 latency behavior. On NVIDIA T4, FP32 latency in-creases significantly as batch size grows. For ResNet18, me-dian latency increases from approximately 6 ms at B = 1 

to over 400 ms at B = 512 . ResNet50 latency increases from roughly 10 ms at B = 1 to approximately 1400 ms at B = 512 , while ResNet101 increases from approximately 18 ms to over 2400 ms across the same range. Reduced precision significantly lowers latency. Using FP16 precision, ResNet18 latency at B = 512 decreases to ap-proximately 200 ms, representing roughly a 2 × improvement over FP32. Similarly, ResNet50 FP16 latency reaches ap-proximately 600 ms at B = 512 , while ResNet101 reaches approximately 1000 ms. INT8 TensorRT demonstrates substantially lower latency across all batch sizes. For example, ResNet18 INT8 latency at B = 512 is approximately 60 ms, while ResNet50 reaches roughly 110 ms and ResNet101 approximately 170 ms. These results indicate that reduced numerical precision significantly improves execution efficiency by reducing memory movement and increasing Tensor Core utilization. 

L4 latency behavior. NVIDIA L4 demonstrates consis-tently lower latency compared to T4 across all models and precision modes. For ResNet18, FP32 latency increases from approximately 4 ms at B = 1 to approximately 220 ms at 

B = 512 , representing roughly a 1.8 × reduction compared to T4 FP32 latency at large batch sizes. FP16 further improves response time efficiency. ResNet18 FP16 latency reaches approximately 130 ms at B = 512 ,while ResNet50 reaches approximately 430 ms and ResNet101 approximately 660 ms. INT8 provides the lowest latency across all configurations. For ResNet18, INT8 latency remains below 20 ms even at 

B = 512 , demonstrating strong execution efficiency. ResNet50 INT8 latency reaches approximately 65 ms at B = 512 , while ResNet101 remains near 105 ms. Several important latency trends emerge from the experi-mental results. Latency increases approximately linearly with batch size across all evaluated models, indicating predictable scaling behavior as inference workloads grow. This linear relationship suggests that the GPUs maintain stable execution characteristics even as the number of input samples processed simultaneously increases. INT8 precision consistently provides the lowest latency across all models and batch sizes, demonstrating the efficiency of reduced precision execution on Tensor Core architectures. Lower numerical precision reduces arithmetic complexity and improves computational density, allowing faster kernel execu-tion compared to FP32 and FP16 modes. Across all tested configurations, the NVIDIA L4 achieves significantly lower latency than the NVIDIA T4, indicating im-provements in kernel execution efficiency, memory bandwidth utilization, and architectural parallelism. These architectural enhancements enable the L4 to process inference workloads more efficiently while maintaining stable execution character-istics across different batch sizes. As expected, larger models exhibit higher latency due to increased computational complexity and deeper network structures. For example, FP32 latency at B = 512 increases from approximately 400 ms for ResNet18 to approximately 2400 ms for ResNet101 on T4, reflecting the greater arithmetic workload required for larger convolutional networks. Overall, the results demonstrate that modern GPU archi-tectures such as L4 improve both throughput and latency simultaneously, enabling higher request processing capacity without proportional increases in response time. Tail latency (P99) measurements show similar scaling trends and remain stable across batch sizes, indicating predictable execution behavior suitable for real-time inference deployment scenarios. These characteristics make L4 particularly well suited for latency-sensitive inference workloads commonly encountered in production datacenter environments. 

C. Tail Latency Behavior Across T4 and L4 

Tail latency, measured using P99 response time, captures worst-case inference performance and provides insight into system predictability under varying workload sizes. Across both NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4 platforms, P99 latency increases with batch size for all evaluated models (ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101) and precision modes (FP32, FP16, and INT8). This increase reflects the larger activation working set and longer kernel execution times associated with higher batch sizes. Across both GPUs, a consistent ordering of precision modes is observed. FP32 exhibits the highest P99 latency, FP16 pro-vides a substantial reduction, and INT8 consistently achieves the lowest tail latency. For example, at larger batch sizes (B=512), ResNet18 P99 latency on T4 reaches approximately 400 ms in FP32, compared to roughly 220 ms on L4, repre-senting an improvement of about 45%. Under FP16 precision, ResNet18 P99 latency decreases from roughly 200 ms on T4 to approximately 130 ms on L4, corresponding to an improvement of about 35%. INT8 provides the lowest tail latency on both platforms, with L4 achieving approximately 15–20 ms at large batch sizes compared to roughly 50–60 ms on T4, representing more than a 60% reduction. For ResNet50, the numerical differences between architec-tures become more pronounced as model complexity increases. At B=512, FP32 P99 latency on T4 approaches approximately 1350 ms, whereas L4 achieves roughly 800 ms, corresponding to an improvement of about 40%. FP16 shows a similar trend, with T4 reaching approximately 600 ms compared to about 430 ms on L4. INT8 again demonstrates the strongest (a) ResNet18 (b) ResNet50 (c) ResNet101   

> (d) ResNet18 (e) ResNet50 (f) ResNet101

Fig. 9: GPU memory usage measured via NVML across batch sizes. Top row shows NVIDIA T4 results, bottom row shows NVIDIA L4 results. FP32 requires the highest memory allocation due to larger tensor representation, followed by FP16 and INT8. Memory usage remains relatively stable across batch sizes, indicating that model weights dominate memory consumption, while activation memory increases gradually with batch size. L4 shows slightly higher baseline allocation due to architectural differences and runtime memory management behavior. improvement, with T4 reaching approximately 160–170 ms compared to roughly 60–70 ms on L4. For the deepest evaluated model, ResNet101, tail latency differences further widen due to increased arithmetic intensity. At larger batch sizes, FP32 P99 latency on T4 exceeds approximately 2200 ms, while L4 achieves roughly 1200 ms, representing an improvement of about 45%. FP16 latency decreases from approximately 1000 ms on T4 to around 650 ms on L4. INT8 continues to show the lowest tail latency, with T4 reaching approximately 180–200 ms compared to roughly 100–110 ms on L4. Overall, L4 demonstrates consistently lower P99 latency across all evaluated workloads and precision modes relative to T4. Observed reductions typically range from 35% to 50% for FP32 and FP16 precision modes, and from approximately 40% to 65% for INT8. These improvements reflect architectural enhancements in the L4 GPU, including increased compute throughput, improved Tensor Core efficiency, higher mem-ory bandwidth, and larger cache capacity. Reduced precision further improves tail-latency stability by lowering computa-tional cost per inference and reducing variability in execution time. INT8 consistently provides the strongest tail-latency performance across both platforms, making it particularly well suited for latency-sensitive inference deployments requiring predictable response times and tight service-level objectives. 

D. Latency Comparison Across Precision Modes 

Figure 7 summarizes median latency across models and precision modes for both T4 and L4 GPUs. Across all models, INT8 achieves the lowest latency due to reduced numerical precision and optimized Tensor Core execution. FP16 provides intermediate latency, while FP32 shows the highest latency due to increased computational cost. Latency increases with model depth, with ResNet101 show-ing the highest inference time. Comparing architectures, L4 demonstrates consistently lower latency than T4, indicating improved compute efficiency and memory subsystem performance. 

E. GPU Memory Utilization (NVML) 

Figure 9 shows GPU memory utilization measured using NVIDIA Management Library (NVML) across batch sizes for both T4 and L4 GPUs. Across all configurations, GPU memory usage is primarily determined by model size and numerical precision, with rela-tively small increases as batch size grows. This indicates that model weights and framework runtime allocations dominate total memory usage, while activation memory contributes incrementally as batch size increases. 

T4 memory behavior. On NVIDIA T4, FP32 preci-sion shows the highest memory allocation across all mod-els. ResNet18 requires approximately 4.9 GB of memory, ResNet50 approximately 7.6 GB, and ResNet101 approxi-mately 6.1 GB. (a) ResNet18 (b) ResNet50 (c) ResNet101   

> (d) ResNet18 (e) ResNet50 (f) ResNet101

Fig. 10: Latency vs throughput Pareto tradeoff across batch sizes. Top row shows NVIDIA T4 results and bottom row shows NVIDIA L4 results. Each point represents a batch size configuration. Moving right increases latency while moving up increases throughput. INT8 achieves the best throughput–latency tradeoff, followed by FP16 and FP32. L4 consistently dominates T4 across most operating regions, providing higher throughput for comparable latency levels. FP16 reduces memory requirements significantly. ResNet18 requires approximately 3.1 GB, ResNet50 approximately 5.2 GB, and ResNet101 approximately 5.2 GB. INT8 TensorRT demonstrates the lowest memory footprint. ResNet18 requires approximately 1.95 GB at small batch sizes, increasing slightly to approximately 2.2 GB at B = 512 .ResNet50 increases from approximately 2.65 GB to 2.9 GB across the same range, while ResNet101 increases from ap-proximately 2.65 GB to approximately 2.95 GB. Memory growth across batch sizes is modest. For example, ResNet50 INT8 memory increases by less than 300 MB when batch size increases from 1 to 512, indicating that activation storage contributes only a small fraction of total memory usage. 

L4 memory behavior. NVIDIA L4 shows slightly higher baseline memory allocation compared to T4. FP32 memory usage reaches approximately 5.6 GB for ResNet18, approxi-mately 8.0 GB for ResNet50, and approximately 7.9 GB for ResNet101. FP16 memory usage on L4 remains consistent with expected precision scaling. ResNet18 requires approximately 3.0 GB, ResNet50 approximately 5.3 GB, and ResNet101 approxi-mately 5.3 GB. INT8 TensorRT again demonstrates the lowest memory utilization. ResNet18 requires approximately 2.75 GB at small batch sizes and increases slightly to approximately 3.05 GB at B = 512 . ResNet50 increases from approximately 3.45 GB to approximately 3.75 GB, while ResNet101 increases from approximately 3.45 GB to approximately 3.8 GB. Several important memory utilization trends emerge from the experimental results. Memory usage remains largely in-dependent of batch size across the evaluated configurations, confirming that model parameters dominate total GPU mem-ory consumption. This behavior indicates that the majority of allocated GPU memory is associated with static model weights and framework-level runtime buffers rather than batch-dependent activation scaling. INT8 precision consistently reduces the overall memory footprint by approximately 2–3 × compared to FP32, enabling larger batch sizes within fixed GPU memory constraints. Re-duced numerical precision decreases the storage requirements for model parameters and intermediate activations, allowing more efficient utilization of available device memory while supporting higher inference throughput. The NVIDIA L4 shows slightly higher baseline memory allocation (approximately 300–500 MB) compared to the NVIDIA T4. This difference is likely attributable to variations in CUDA runtime workspace allocation, kernel scheduling buffers, or driver-level optimization strategies that influence initial memory reservation behavior. As expected, larger models require proportionally more GPU memory due to increased parameter counts and deeper network structures. For example, FP32 memory usage in-creases from approximately 4.9 GB for ResNet18 to approxi-mately 8.0 GB for ResNet50 on L4, reflecting the additional storage required for convolutional weights and intermediate (a) ResNet18 (b) ResNet50 (c) ResNet101   

> (d) ResNet18 (e) ResNet50 (f) ResNet101

Fig. 11: Throughput speedup relative to FP32 baseline across batch sizes. Top row shows NVIDIA T4 results, bottom row shows NVIDIA L4 results. FP16 provides moderate speedup over FP32, while INT8 achieves significantly higher speedup due to reduced numerical precision and improved Tensor Core utilization. Speedup increases with batch size until reaching a stable region where GPU compute resources are fully utilized. L4 achieves higher peak speedup compared to T4, reflecting architectural improvements in modern inference-optimized GPUs. feature maps. Overall, the results indicate that precision reduction im-proves both computational efficiency and memory utilization. Lower precision enables larger batch sizes without exceeding GPU memory limits, contributing directly to the throughput improvements observed in Section V-A. 

F. Latency–Throughput Tradeoff (Pareto Analysis) 

Figure 10 illustrates the tradeoff between median latency and throughput across batch sizes for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101 on both T4 and L4 GPUs. Each point represents a batch size configuration, showing how throughput improves as latency increases due to larger batches enabling greater parallel execution. Operating points located toward the upper-left region of each plot represent more efficient configurations, achieving higher throughput with lower response time. 

T4 Pareto behavior. On NVIDIA T4, FP32 configurations show limited throughput improvement as latency increases. For example, ResNet18 FP32 throughput increases from ap-proximately 700 images/sec at low latency ( ∼6 ms) to approx-imately 1289 images/sec at high latency ( ∼400 ms), indicating diminishing returns from increasing batch size. FP16 improves the tradeoff by increasing throughput at moderate latency levels. ResNet18 FP16 achieves approxi-mately 2569 images/sec at approximately 200 ms latency, providing roughly 2 × higher throughput compared to FP32 at similar latency. INT8 TensorRT provides substantially better tradeoff char-acteristics. ResNet18 INT8 achieves approximately 8837 im-ages/sec at approximately 60 ms latency, demonstrating both significantly higher throughput and lower latency compared to FP32. Similar trends are observed for larger models. For ResNet50, INT8 reaches approximately 5066 images/sec at approximately 110 ms latency, while FP32 achieves only ap-proximately 382 images/sec at approximately 700 ms latency. For ResNet101, INT8 achieves approximately 3125 images/sec at approximately 170 ms latency, compared to approximately 226 images/sec at approximately 2400 ms latency for FP32. 

L4 Pareto behavior. NVIDIA L4 demonstrates substantial improvement across the entire Pareto frontier. Across all models, L4 achieves higher throughput at significantly lower latency compared to T4. For ResNet18, L4 INT8 achieves approximately 38,932 images/sec at approximately 15 ms latency, representing more than a 4× throughput improvement over T4 INT8 while simultaneously reducing latency by approximately 4 ×.ResNet50 L4 INT8 achieves approximately 13,388 im-ages/sec at approximately 65 ms latency, compared to approx-imately 5066 images/sec at approximately 110 ms latency on T4. For ResNet101, L4 INT8 achieves approximately 8026 images/sec at approximately 105 ms latency, compared to ap-proximately 3125 images/sec at approximately 170 ms latency on T4. Several important patterns emerge from the Pareto curves. INT8 precision consistently forms the Pareto-optimal frontier across all evaluated models, achieving both higher throughput and lower latency compared to FP16 and FP32 configurations. This indicates that reduced numerical precision improves computational efficiency while maintaining favorable latency characteristics, allowing more inference operations to be pro-cessed per unit time. FP16 provides intermediate performance improvements, re-ducing latency by approximately 1.5–2 × compared to FP32 while increasing throughput by approximately 2–4 ×. These improvements reflect the benefits of reduced precision arith-metic while maintaining higher numerical resolution than INT8. Across all workloads, the NVIDIA L4 shifts the Pareto frontier upward and to the left relative to the NVIDIA T4, indicating simultaneous improvements in both throughput and latency. This shift demonstrates the architectural advantages of the L4, including improved Tensor Core performance, memory bandwidth efficiency, and enhanced parallel execution capability. As expected, larger batch sizes improve throughput but increase latency, demonstrating the inherent tradeoff between response time and processing efficiency in GPU inference systems. However, the L4 achieves near-peak throughput at relatively small batch sizes ( B = 16 –32 ), enabling high performance without requiring large latency increases. This characteristic is particularly beneficial for real-time inference environments where strict latency constraints limit the use of very large batch sizes. These Pareto curves illustrate that optimal batch size se-lection depends on workload requirements. Latency-sensitive applications may operate at smaller batch sizes to minimize response time, while throughput-oriented batch processing systems may benefit from larger batch sizes that maximize computational efficiency. Overall, the results show that mod-ern GPU architectures significantly improve the latency– throughput tradeoff, enabling higher inference performance without proportional increases in response time. 

G. Speedup Relative to FP32 Baseline 

Figure 11 shows throughput speedup relative to FP32 across batch sizes for ResNet18, ResNet50, and ResNet101 on both T4 and L4 GPUs. Across all models, reduced precision consistently im-proves performance relative to FP32. FP16 provides moderate speedup due to reduced numerical precision and efficient Tensor Core utilization, while INT8 demonstrates substantially larger performance gains by enabling increased parallel exe-cution and reduced memory traffic. 

T4 speedup behavior. On NVIDIA T4, FP16 provides approximately 1.8 ×–2.2 × speedup across most batch sizes. For example, ResNet18 FP16 achieves approximately 2.0 ×

speedup at large batch sizes ( B ≥ 128 ), while ResNet50 and ResNet101 show similar gains near 2.1 ×–2.3 ×.INT8 demonstrates significantly larger improvements. For ResNet18, INT8 speedup increases rapidly from approxi-mately 2.5 × at small batch sizes to approximately 7 × at larger batch sizes. ResNet50 achieves peak speedup near 13 × relative to FP32, while ResNet101 achieves approximately 13–14 ×

speedup at moderate batch sizes ( B = 256 –512). Speedup increases with batch size until the GPU reaches effective utilization. Beyond moderate batch sizes, speedup stabilizes as hardware resources become fully saturated. 

L4 speedup behavior. NVIDIA L4 demonstrates higher speedup across most configurations compared to T4, reflecting improvements in Tensor Core throughput, memory bandwidth, and architectural parallelism. FP16 on L4 provides consistent speedup of approximately 1.6 ×–2.1 × across models, similar to T4 but achieved at smaller batch sizes due to improved hardware efficiency. INT8 provides the largest gains. For ResNet18, INT8 speedup reaches approximately 14 × relative to FP32, remain-ing stable across larger batch sizes. ResNet50 achieves peak speedup near 17–18 × at moderate batch sizes ( B = 32 –64), while ResNet101 achieves approximately 15–16 × speedup. Compared to T4, L4 achieves similar or higher peak speedup at significantly smaller batch sizes, indicating im-proved architectural efficiency and better utilization of Tensor Core resources. Several important speedup trends emerge when comparing reduced precision modes against the FP32 baseline. FP16 con-sistently provides approximately 2 × speedup across all eval-uated models, demonstrating the efficiency of half-precision computation on Tensor Core architectures. Reduced precision enables higher arithmetic throughput and more efficient utiliza-tion of GPU compute resources while maintaining numerical stability suitable for inference workloads. INT8 provides the largest performance improvement, reach-ing up to 14 × speedup on the NVIDIA T4 and up to 18 × speedup on the NVIDIA L4. These results highlight the substantial computational advantages enabled by lower numerical precision, where increased arithmetic density allows more operations to be executed per cycle. Speedup increases rapidly between batch sizes 1–32 as GPU utilization improves and parallel execution resources become more effectively utilized. Beyond this range, speedup stabilizes as compute resources approach saturation, indicating that additional batching provides diminishing relative performance gains. Across most configurations, the NVIDIA L4 achieves com-parable or higher speedup at smaller batch sizes compared to the NVIDIA T4, indicating improved compute efficiency and reduced dependence on aggressive batching strategies. Larger models benefit significantly from reduced precision because increased computational complexity amplifies the advantages of Tensor Core acceleration [8]. Overall, the results demonstrate that reduced precision substantially improves inference efficiency relative to FP32 baselines. Modern architectures such as L4 further amplify these benefits by achieving higher speedup at smaller batch sizes, improving both throughput scalability and latency– throughput tradeoff characteristics. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented DEEP-GAP, a systematic evaluation of GPU inference performance across modern datacenter-oriented architectures using NVIDIA T4 and NVIDIA L4 GPUs. By extending the GDEV-AI benchmarking methodology to GPU environments, we analyzed throughput, latency, tail latency, memory utilization, and precision-based scaling across multi-ple ResNet models. Our results demonstrate that reduced numerical precision plays a critical role in maximizing inference efficiency. FP16 consistently improves throughput over FP32, while INT8 Ten-sorRT achieves the highest performance gains due to reduced data width and increased Tensor Core utilization. Across all evaluated models, INT8 provides the most favorable latency-throughput tradeoff, enabling significantly higher processing capacity within similar latency constraints. Comparative analysis between T4 and L4 reveals substantial architectural improvements in newer GPU generations. L4 achieves significantly higher throughput and improved scaling efficiency across batch sizes, while maintaining stable latency behavior. Peak throughput improvements of up to 58 × relative to CPU execution highlight the impact of specialized hardware acceleration for deep learning inference workloads. Our findings show that optimal batch sizes typically occur within moderate ranges, where GPU compute resources are fully utilized without incurring excessive memory bandwidth pressure or runtime overhead. Beyond this region, throughput stabilizes or slightly declines, indicating a shift from compute-bound to memory-bound execution. Overall, the results provide practical guidance for select-ing precision modes and batch sizes when deploying infer-ence workloads in production datacenter environments. The methodology and findings presented in DEEP-GAP contribute to a clearer understanding of how modern GPU architectures translate theoretical compute capability into real-world infer-ence performance. VII. F UTURE WORK 

While this study evaluates single-tenant inference perfor-mance under controlled conditions, future work will ex-tend DEEP-GAP to multi-tenant environments where multiple workloads share the same GPU infrastructure. In real-world datacenter deployments, GPUs are commonly shared across heterogeneous inference services with differing latency and throughput requirements. Future work will inves-tigate scheduling strategies, resource sharing mechanisms, and quality-of-service (QoS) considerations that influence perfor-mance predictability under concurrent workloads. This direction extends DEEP-GAP toward understanding how modern GPU architectures behave under realistic shared deployment conditions, providing insights for efficient re-source allocation in large-scale AI systems. REFERENCES [1] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” NeurIPS, 2012. [2] J. Deng et al., “ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database,” CVPR, 2009. [3] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” CVPR, 2016. [4] A. Canziani, A. Paszke, and E. Culurciello, “An Analysis of Deep Neural Network Models for Practical Applications,” arXiv:1605.07678, 2016. [5] PyTorch Contributors, TorchVision ResNet Documentation . Available: https://docs.pytorch.org/vision/main/models/resnet.html [6] L. Barroso, J. Clidaras, and U. Holzle, “The Datacenter as a Computer,” Morgan & Claypool, 2013. [7] N. Jouppi et al., “In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit,” ISCA, 2017. [8] P. Micikevicius et al., “Mixed precision training,” ICLR, 2018. [9] B. Jacob et al., “Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference,” CVPR, 2018. [10] R. Krishnamoorthi, “Quantizing deep convolutional networks for effi-cient inference,” arXiv:1806.08342, 2018. [11] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA TensorRT Documentation . Available: https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/tensorrt/latest/index.html [12] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA TensorRT Developer Guide . Available: https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/tensorrt/archives/tensorrt-861/ developer-guide/index.html [13] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA Turing GPU Architecture Whitepaper ,2018. [14] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA Ampere Architecture Whitepaper , 2020. [15] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA Ada GPU Architecture Whitepaper ,2022. [16] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA T4 Tensor Core GPU Datasheet , 2018. [17] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA L4 Tensor Core GPU Datasheet , 2023. [18] V. J. Reddi et al., “MLPerf Inference Benchmark,” ISCA, 2020. [19] J. Dean and L. Barroso, “The Tail at Scale,” Communications of the ACM, 2013. [20] S. Williams, A. Waterman, and D. Patterson, “Roofline: An insightful visual performance model for multicore architectures,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 65–76, 2009. [21] V. Volkov, “Better performance at lower occupancy,” Proceedings of GPU Technology Conference (GTC), 2010. [22] M. Jeon et al., “Analysis of Large-Scale Multi-Tenant GPU Clusters for DNN Training Workloads,” USENIX ATC, 2019. [23] J. Pineau et al., “Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research,” JMLR, 2021. [24] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. Dally, “Deep Compression: Compressing Deep Neural Networks with Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman Coding,” ICLR, 2016. [25] Y. Kang et al., “GPUSync: A Framework for Real-Time GPU Manage-ment,” IEEE RTSS, 2017. [26] J. Dean, “Achieving Rapid Response Times in Large Online Services,” ACM Queue, 2013. [27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention Is All You Need,” NeurIPS, 2017. [28] K. Palaniappan, “GDEV-AI: A Generalized Evaluation of Deep Learning Inference Scaling and Architectural Saturation,” arXiv preprint, 2026. [29] K. Palaniappan, “DEEP-GAP GPU Inference Benchmark,” GitHub repository, 2026. Available: https://github.com/kpalania1/ deep-gap-gpu-inference-benchmark