Title: T-CCL: Resource Efficient and Performant Collective Communication using Tensor Memory Accelerator

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.07098v1

Published Time: Wed, 07 Oct 2026 00:08:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# T-CCL: Resource Efficient and Performant Collective Communication using Tensor Memory Accelerator 

Keyvan Dadashzadeh 

Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg 

Gothenburg, Sweden keyvand@chalmers.se 

Yuehong Zhou 

Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg 

Gothenburg, Sweden yuehong@student.chalmers.se 

Minyu Cui 

Linnaeus University 

V¨ axj¨ o, Sweden minyu.cui@lnu.se 

Miquel Peric` as 

Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg 

Gothenburg, Sweden miquelp@chalmers.se 

Abstract —Large transformer-based models increasingly de-pend on multi-GPU execution, which requires frequent collective communication among GPUs. Existing communication libraries often rely on many GPU threads to achieve high bandwidth or low latency, resulting in a large streaming multiprocessor (SM)-side resource footprint. This footprint can limit the resources available to other GPU work, particularly when communication and computation execute concurrently. Thus, efficient collective communication should not only achieve high collective perfor-mance but also reduce its SM-side resource usage. This paper presents T-CCL, a resource-efficient collective communication library based on the Tensor Memory Accelerator (TMA) for intra-node communication. T-CCL offloads both data movement and reduction operations to TMA and executes each collective as a pipelined series of asynchronous TMA operations, reducing the SM resources required for collective communication while maintaining high bandwidth. Evaluated across AllReduce, AllGather, and ReduceScatter collectives, T-CCL outperforms NCCL by up to 2.4 × with unrestricted communication resources and up to 3.42 × under restricted resource budgets, remains competitive with NCCL’s recent symmetric-memory kernels, and occupies the same or fewer SMs in profiled cases. In a GEMM– collective overlap case study, switching the communication back-end from NCCL to T-CCL raises the average operator-level speedup over a sequential baseline from 1.12 × to 1.25 × on two GPUs and from 1.04 × to 1.14 × on four GPUs, as T-CCL uses fewer SMs for communication, leaving more SMs available to the overlapped GEMM. Integrated into vLLM as a communication backend, T-CCL improves end-to-end inference throughput over vLLM’s automatic backend dispatch by up to 1.31 ×, outperforming it at every evaluated batch size on both the conversation and decode-heavy workloads. 

Index Terms —Collective communication, Tensor Memory Ac-celerator (TMA), Multi-GPU systems, Compute-communication overlap 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The scale of modern transformer-based models often makes single-GPU execution impractical. Their parameters, acti-vations, and intermediate tensors may exceed the memory available on one device. Consequently, training and infer-ence increasingly rely on execution across multiple GPUs. Several parallelization strategies distribute model computation across multiple GPUs. Tensor parallelism is widely used and partitions the weights and computation of individual layers among the participating devices. Each GPU computes a partial result, which must then be combined or redistributed through collective operations such as AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather [1], [2]. Because these collectives are invoked repeatedly within transformer blocks, they often lie on the critical execution path. Performance therefore depends on both computation efficiency and collective communication efficiency. The performance of collective operations depends on several system characteristics, including the number of participating GPUs, the interconnect topology, and the com-munication paths involved. These paths may remain within one node or may traverse links between nodes. In this work, we focus on systems with multiple GPUs in one node, where each participating GPU has peer-to-peer access to one another’s memory. Starting with Hopper-generation GPUs, NVIDIA introduced the Tensor Memory Accelerator, dedicated hardware designed for asynchronous bulk movement of multidimensional tensor data between global memory (HBM) and shared memory (SMEM) [3]. Conventional transfers were commonly per-formed through thread-driven instructions, with many threads participating in address generation and data movement. Con-sequently, the achievable transfer throughput and resource cost depended on the number of threads assigned to the operation. In contrast, TMA allows a bulk transfer to be initiated by a single elected thread within a thread block (TB), after which the transfer proceeds asynchronously through dedicated hardware. This offloads address generation and data movement 

SC26 Workshops, November 15-20, 2026, Chicago, Illinois, USA 979-8-3195-1221-5/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE arXiv:2610.07098v1 [cs.DC] 5 Oct 2026 from GPU threads, allowing the thread block to continue other computation while the transfer is in flight [3]. Due to its asynchronous nature, TMA is attractive for collective communication, where partial results must be transferred at high bandwidth while keeping the SM resource footprint small. In intra-node systems where GPUs have peer-to-peer access to one another’s memory, TMA can be used alongside thread-driven load/store instructions and copy engines. Thread-driven communication is flexible and can directly perform reductions, but it consumes SM resources, whereas copy engines move data asynchronously but do not directly support element-wise reduction. TMA supports both asynchronous bulk data move-ment and reduction operations. Based on these capabilities, we make two observations that motivate its use as a mechanism for intra-node collective communication [3]. 

First, TMA provides a resource-efficient mechanism for moving data between global memory and shared memory, including transfers to or from peer GPU memory. Conven-tional thread-driven collective kernels require many threads to perform such data movement, whereas a TMA transfer can be initiated by a single thread and proceeds asynchronously. Therefore, TMA-based communication has the potential to sustain high bandwidth with fewer threads and CTAs, thereby reducing its SM resource footprint. 

Second, beyond data movement, TMA can offload a sub-stantial part of the reduction work required by collective communication. Data movement is only one component of a collective; operations such as AllReduce and ReduceScatter must also combine values contributed by multiple GPUs through an element-wise reduction, such as summation [2]. In conventional GPU kernels, GPU threads are responsible not only for moving data but also for performing these reductions, and contributions from multiple GPUs must be coordinated to avoid conflicting updates. Therefore, reductions are a major source of communication-side resource usage. TMA also sup-ports asynchronous bulk reduction operations, including addi-tion, minimum, and maximum. PTX defines these operations as asynchronous element-wise atomic reductions, which can simplify the coordination of concurrent updates and reduce the amount of thread-level work required for reduction [4]. Based on these observations, we present T-CCL , a TMA-based collective communication library for intra-node com-munication. The goal of T-CCL is to deliver a better tradeoff between collective bandwidth and SM usage than NCCL [2], particularly for resource-constrained execution in which com-munication shares the GPU resources with computation. The contributions of this work are as follows:  

> •

We design and implement T-CCL, an intra-node collec-tive communication library that offloads both inter-GPU data movement and reduction to TMA. T-CCL supports AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather collectives.  

> •

We evaluate T-CCL against NCCL and NCCL’s symmetric-memory kernels, and show that T-CCL deliv-ers comparable or better performance across AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather, with only a few small-message regressions, while using the same or fewer SM resources.  

> •

In a first case study on compute–communication overlap, a widely adopted latency-hiding technique in which com-munication and computation compete for SM resources, we show that T-CCL’s lower SM usage can translate into higher operator-level overlap speedup than NCCL-based overlap.  

> •

In a second case study, we integrate T-CCL into vLLM as a communication backend and evaluate it under tensor-parallel inference, showing that its communication-level gains translate into higher end-to-end throughput, with the largest improvements on a decode-heavy workload where collectives are invoked more frequently. II. R ELATED WORK 

Collective communication libraries (CCLs) provide the communication backbone for distributed training and infer-ence. Among well-known CCLs, NCCL has become the de facto standard high-performance collective backend for NVIDIA GPU systems. NCCL abstracts topology discovery, communication setup, and the selection of algorithms, proto-cols, channels, and transport paths [2], [5]. This design hides much of the complexity of collective communication from users and allows NCCL to operate efficiently across a wide range of systems. Following this design philosophy, T-CCL similarly hides low-level scheduling and communication setup from users. Starting with version 2.27, NCCL introduced symmetric-memory kernels to reduce latency and improve bandwidth. Recent NCCL releases also integrate TMA into the load/store path of selected symmetric-memory kernels, making NCCL one of the first widely used CCLs to adopt TMA for collective communication. This TMA path is enabled by default only on Blackwell and newer architectures. Unlike T-CCL, which accepts user-provided buffers, symmetric NCCL requires com-munication buffers to be allocated using CUDA Virtual Mem-ory Management (VMM)-based allocators, complicating direct use with framework-managed buffers such as PyTorch tensors. While NCCL and T-CCL hide much of the communication process from users, other systems expose more of it to provide greater programmability. As a case in point, MSCCL allows users to define custom collective schedules through a domain-specific language, while MSCCL++ further extends this approach with more programmable abstractions and access to lower-level communication primitives [6], [7]. NVSHMEM similarly exposes low-level communication primitives through a partitioned global address space and GPU-initiated memory operations, enabling fine-grained communication from device code [8]. Beyond programmability and ease of use, some systems, more closely aligned with the principles of T-CCL, focus on reducing the resource usage of collective communication. To start with, ResCCL observes that many CCLs use static CTA allocations and inefficient internal scheduling mechanisms [9]. To address this, ResCCL schedules communication primitives according to their data dependencies and supports flexible CTA allocation to reduce pipeline bubbles, improve bandwidth utilization, and lower SM usage. VCCL [10] takes a different approach to resource efficiency by offloading point-to-point data movement that does not involve reduction to CPU threads and GPU copy engines. Finally, another category of work explores reducing com-munication overhead through new hardware designs or co-design with emerging hardware capabilities. For example, T3 proposes hardware support for tracking computation progress, triggering communication, and performing data movement through DMA without requiring additional GPU compute units [11]. ParallelKittens, which builds on ThunderKit-tens [12], demonstrates efficient data movement and reduction using NVSwitch-supported communication mechanisms [13]. In contrast, T-CCL uses the TMA unit already available within each GPU as its communication substrate, without requiring additional interconnect-level or custom hardware support. III. S YSTEM DESIGN 

In this section, we introduce the main components of T-CCL and describe how it executes a collective operation, from the high-level interface down to the underlying data movement. T-CCL is organized as a set of high-level and low-level abstractions that enable collective operations to be executed efficiently. We first describe the programming model exposed by T-CCL and how users invoke collective operations through this interface. We then explain how each collective is translated into a set of logical transfer and reduction operations, and how these logical operations are lowered into physical transfer tasks specific to each GPU. Finally, we present the TMA engine, which serves as the main execution component and efficiently carries out these physical tasks by issuing TMA instructions in a pipelined manner. 

A. Programming Model 

T-CCL organizes the participating GPUs into a communica-tion Group , where each GPU is assigned a unique rank. T-CCL supports AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather in both single-process and multiprocess execution modes. The group-creation interface differs between the two modes. In single-process mode, one process creates a group containing all par-ticipating GPUs. In multiprocess mode, each process creates a local view of the communication group. To synchronize the processes and exchange the information required to access peer buffers, T-CCL adopts the interprocess communication utilities from ThunderKittens [12]. After group creation, both execution modes use the same collective interfaces. These interfaces follow the collective semantics of NCCL [2], which simplifies the integration of T-CCL into applications built around NCCL. Each rank passes only its local buffer, while T-CCL internally handles access to the corresponding buffers on the other participating ranks. T-CCL supports both in-place collectives, which reuse the input buffer for the output, and out-of-place collectives, which use separate input and output buffers. T-CCL favors in-place execution because it can reduce the number of transfer tasks and, in multiprocess mode, avoids exchanging information for separate output buffers. 

B. Task-Based Collective Planning 1) Shard Ownership: For a collective with P participating ranks, T-CCL partitions the logical tensor into P shards and assigns one shard to each rank. The owner of a shard is responsible for producing its final value and, when required, propagating that value to the other ranks. Fig. 1 illustrates this design for shard 0 in a four-GPU group. In the shard-in phase shown in Fig. 1(a), the contributions corresponding to shard 0 are transferred from the other GPUs to GPU 0 and reduced there. In the shard-out phase shown in Fig. 1(b), GPU 0 propagates the final value of shard 0 to the other GPUs. In both phases, GPU 0 owns shard 0 and drives the associated operations because peer-to-peer memory access allows it to access the required data on the other GPUs without their active participation. T-CCL prioritizes reduction into the owner’s local shard rather than directly into peer memory. Cross-device reduction is more expensive than loading data from peer memory and reducing it locally. It also requires stricter atomic guarantees because multiple GPUs may concurrently target the same memory region. By performing reduction in the shard-in phase and propagation in the shard-out phase, T-CCL reduces the need for fine-grained cross-device coordination. As a result, synchronization is mainly required at the boundaries of the collective: at the beginning, to ensure that the input buffers are ready, and at the end, to ensure that all assigned work has completed. Because the number of these synchronization points does not grow with the message size, the synchroniza-tion overhead does not scale with the message size. 

2) Logical Transfer Tasks: T-CCL uses a task as the basic unit of communication and execution between GPUs. The component responsible for generating these tasks is the 

planner . The planner tracks the location and ownership of each shard and generates the logical copy, reduction, and synchronization tasks required to produce the final value of every shard. Each logical task specifies the operation, the executing rank, the source and destination regions, and its dependencies on other tasks. The planner runs on only one rank, typically the rank with the lowest identifier in the group. Once the logical plan is ready, it is shared with the other ranks through pre-allocated buffers. Each rank independently lowers its assigned logical tasks into physical transfer tasks, resolving details such as memory addresses and the transfer mechanism used to execute each task. This separation is important because the planner requires a global view of the topology to construct an efficient col-lective execution plan, whereas physical-task generation deals with the constraints and efficient execution of that plan on an individual GPU. The design therefore enables optimization at both the topology level and the device-execution level. In this work, all evaluations use symmetric GPU topologies and the same communication resource budget for every rank. We (a) Shard-in phase. The owner of a shard receives the corresponding contribu-tions from the other GPUs and combines them to produce the final value of that shard locally. In this example, GPU 0 owns shard 0, receives the shard 0 contributions from the other ranks, and reduces them locally to produce the final value.  

> (b) Shard-out phase. The owner of a shard is responsible for propagating that shard to the other GPUs that require it. In this example, GPU 0 owns shard 0 and propagates it to the other ranks. Fig. 1. Shard ownership and lifecycle in T-CCL for a four-GPU group. Shard colors indicate ownership, with each shard colored according to its owning GPU. Figure (a) shows GPU 0 receiving and reducing the shard 0 contributions from the other ranks. Figure (b) shows GPU 0 propagating shard 0 to the other ranks.

therefore use a simple planner that generates the same set of tasks for all ranks. 

C. TMA Transfer Engine 1) Chunk and Window Decomposition: Before execution, each logical task is translated into one or more physical tasks. A physical task consists of a series of windows that must be processed, and each window is further divided into fixed-size chunks. A chunk is the basic unit processed by the TMA engine at each step, whereas a window groups a series of chunks and is used to partition larger transfers. A window also provides a natural granularity for tracking the progress of a group of chunks. For future work, we plan to support window-level completion signaling to pipeline dependent reduction and copy operations more closely. Unlike logical-task generation, where the logical plan is generated once and shared among the ranks, physical tasks are generated and optimized independently by each rank according to its local constraints and capabilities. T-CCL applies several optimizations to the resulting physical tasks. We describe three of these prominent optimizations. First, T-CCL applies fan-out , which combines propagation tasks that read the same source region but write to different peer GPUs. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), GPU 0 loads a chunk of its local shard 0 into shared memory once and reuses it for three stores, one to each of the other GPUs. Without fan-out, each destination would require a separate load. Thus, in this example, fan-out reduces the number of loads from three to one without changing the number of stores. Second, T-CCL assigns loads from different peer GPUs to separate CTAs. As described in the shard-in phase, contri-butions from the other GPUs are loaded and reduced into the owner’s local shard. To prevent contention on one peer link from delaying transfers from other peers and leaving the TMA hardware underutilized, T-CCL schedules the load-and-reduction work associated with different peers on separate CTAs. For example, in Fig. 1(a), loads from different peer GPUs are executed by different CTAs. Third, because TMA is primarily designed for bulk data movement, additional care is required to preserve its perfor-mance benefits for small transfers. In particular, when the transfer size is small enough to fit within the shared-memory capacity available to a single CTA, the TMA engine assigns the entire transfer to one CTA. This avoids distributing a small amount of work across multiple CTAs and reduces the associated scheduling and coordination overhead. 

2) Pipelined Copy and Reduction: T-CCL allocates a stag-ing buffer in shared memory (SMEM) and divides it into multiple stages. If the pipeline depth is D and the chunk size is C, then the total staging-buffer size is D×C, which must fit within the shared-memory capacity available to the executing CTA. For instance, H100 provides 228 KB of shared memory per SM and allows up to 227 KB to be addressed by a single thread block [14]. Both the number of stages and the chunk size are configurable. In our design, we logically use half of the stages, D 

> 2

, for chunks whose loads are in flight and the other half for chunks whose store or reduction operations are in flight. This division is motivated by the different completion mechanisms used by TMA. Load completion is tracked through barriers, allowing the executor to wait for a specific load. Store and reduction operations, in contrast, are batched into asynchronous groups using a commit operation. These groups are tracked in a FIFO-like order: waiting until a group completes also requires all earlier committed groups to complete. Thus, the executor cannot wait for an arbitrary store or reduction independently, as it can for a load operation [4]. When the pipeline is initially empty, T-CCL first issues loads for D 

> 2

chunks to fill the pipeline. Execution then pro-ceeds iteratively over the stages. For each stage, T-CCL waits for the previously issued load to complete and then issues the corresponding store or reduction. Before issuing the next load into the stage that is D 

> 2

positions ahead, T-CCL waits for the previous store or reduction using that stage to complete. This allows later chunks to be loaded while earlier chunks are being stored or reduced. After all chunks have been issued, T-CCL waits for the remaining in-flight operations to complete Fig. 2. Pipeline execution of T-CCL’s TMA engine for six chunks using four stages allocated in shared memory. 

and drains the pipeline. Fig. 2 illustrates this procedure for six chunks, including the pipeline-fill, steady-state, and drain phases. 

3) Launch Configuration Tuning: Simply assigning more CTAs does not necessarily improve the performance of the TMA engine. Efficient execution instead requires a balance between the number of CTAs and the amount of transfer work assigned to each CTA, so that the pipeline remains sufficiently utilized while asynchronous operations are in flight. T-CCL therefore uses a simple offline tuning process. For each collective, it evaluates different CTA configurations across various message sizes, ranks the measured configurations by execution time, and stores the ranked configurations in a lookup table indexed by collective operation and message size. When a collective is invoked, each rank selects the entry for the closest measured message size and uses the highest-ranked configuration that fits the available CTA budget. This allows the TMA engine to select a high-performing CTA configuration for a given collective and message size while remaining within the available CTA budget. IV. E VALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Evaluation Settings: We evaluate T-CCL in three set-tings. First, we evaluate T-CCL as a standalone communication backend and compare its collective-operation performance, with and without resource constraints, against NCCL and symmetric NCCL. Second, we study how T-CCL improves compute–communication overlap by maintaining high com-munication bandwidth under limited resource budgets. Finally, we integrate T-CCL with vLLM and evaluate its end-to-end inference performance under two workloads. 

2) Experimental Environment: Unless otherwise stated, we conduct all two-GPU experiments on a system with two H100 NVL GPUs (referred to as the H100 platform) and all four-GPU experiments on a system with four GH200 GPUs (referred to as the GH200 platform). The two GPUs in the H100 platform are connected via NV12, whereas each pair of GPUs in the GH200 platform is connected via NV6. Table II summarizes the key system configurations of the evaluated platforms. 

3) Baselines: We compare T-CCL with standard NCCL and symmetric NCCL. Both are based on NCCL version 2.28, which includes symmetric-memory kernels designed to reduce synchronization overhead [2]. Throughout this section, sym-metric NCCL refers to the NCCL symmetric-memory kernel path. We include symmetric NCCL as a direct baseline only in the standalone collective evaluation, where the communication buffers can be allocated and registered specifically for this purpose. In the other evaluations, the buffers are provided by external components, and using symmetric NCCL directly would require additional data copies. For the LLM inference experiments, we use vLLM version 0.25.0. Unless otherwise stated, we use the same T-CCL configuration across all experiments. We set the chunk size to 8 KB and the pipeline depth to 16, resulting in a total shared-memory staging buffer of 128 KB. Additionally, because we do not use signaling between different communication phases, such as reduction and copying, we set the window-to-chunk ratio to one, meaning that each window consists of a single chunk. We enable T-CCL’s offline launch-configuration tuning in all experiments. 

B. Collective Operation Performance 

To evaluate the collective-operation performance of T-CCL, we organize the results into two message-size ranges and report the metric most appropriate for each. Small messages are especially relevant to latency-sensitive inference phases Fig. 3. Collective-operation performance under unrestricted CTA budgets on the H100 and GH200 platforms. Rows correspond to AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather. The first two columns report latency and bandwidth for TP=2, while the last two columns report latency and bandwidth for TP=4. TABLE I AVERAGE ACTIVE SM USAGE AND T-CCL SPEEDUP OVER NCCL CONFIGURATIONS FOR ALL GATHER AND REDUCE SCATTER ON THE GH200 

> PLATFORM

. TMA NCCL DENOTES NCCL WITH TMA ENABLED .                                                                                             

> Average Active SMs T-CCL Speedup ( ×)Collective Size T-CCL NCCL Sym. NCCL TMA NCCL NCCL Sym. NCCL TMA NCCL AllGather 128 KB 1.32 3.30 1.98 1.65 1.53 1.59 1.98 512 KB 1.32 8.25 1.65 1.65 1.13 1.02 1.23 2 MB 2.64 11.22 2.97 3.63 1.17 1.05 1.05 8 MB 6.60 21.78 7.26 7.92 1.60 1.06 1.49 32 MB 6.60 23.43 7.92 7.92 1.26 1.08 1.28 128 MB 6.60 23.76 9.24 9.24 1.15 1.13 1.20 ReduceScatter 128 KB 1.32 3.30 1.98 1.65 1.21 1.25 1.55 512 KB 2.31 8.25 2.64 2.31 1.45 1.41 1.67 2 MB 2.64 11.22 3.30 2.64 1.17 1.05 1.27 8 MB 7.92 21.78 7.92 8.91 1.40 1.30 1.50 32 MB 7.92 23.10 9.24 7.92 1.20 1.28 1.10 128 MB 9.24 23.76 9.24 9.24 1.11 1.20 1.02

TABLE II EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENTS .

Component H100 platform GH200 platform 

GPU 2× H100 NVL 4× GH200 120 GB CPU 2× AMD EPYC 9354 4× ARM Neoverse-V2 GPU interconnect NV12 NV6 CUDA toolkit 13.3 13.0 

such as decoding, whereas larger transfers arise in both train-ing and inference, including gradient exchange and prompt processing [7]. The first range contains small messages from 

1 KB to 512 KB , for which we report collective latency. The second range contains large messages from 1 MB to 512 MB ,for which we report the bandwidth achieved by the collective operations. For each message size, we perform 50 warm-up iterations to reach steady-state execution, followed by 250 timed iterations. We report the average execution time per iteration over these 250 iterations. Similar to the methodology used by NVIDIA’s NCCL Tests [15], we vary the memory addresses used across consecutive iterations to reduce cache-TABLE III T-CCL SPEEDUP RANGES OVER NCCL AND SYMMETRIC NCCL ACROSS LATENCY AND BANDWIDTH MEASUREMENTS UNDER UNRESTRICTED CTA                

> BUDGETS .
> Platform Collective vs. NCCL vs. Sym. NCCL H100 AllReduce 0.96–1.88 ×0.95–1.45 ×
> ReduceScatter 0.95–1.98 ×0.97–1.53 ×
> AllGather 1.01–2.07 ×1.06–1.23 ×
> GH200 AllReduce 1.02–1.92 ×1.07–1.82 ×
> ReduceScatter 1.11–2.40 ×1.25–2.27 ×
> AllGather 1.13–2.06 ×1.12–1.90 ×

residency effects. For bandwidth measurements, we use algo-rithmic bandwidth (denoted as AlgoBW), which is calculated by dividing the message size by the collective execution time. We evaluate T-CCL, NCCL, and symmetric NCCL under two resource settings. In the first setting, all three configu-rations are allowed to use enough CTAs to achieve their best communication performance. In the second setting, we impose restricted CTA budgets, limiting communication to 9 CTAs on the GH200 platform and 8 CTAs on the H100 platform. We select these limits because, in our measurements, T-CCL already approaches bandwidth saturation at 8 CTAs on H100 and 9 CTAs on GH200. 

a) Unrestricted CTA Budgets: Fig. 3 shows the per-formance of T-CCL, NCCL, and symmetric NCCL under unrestricted CTA budgets on both the GH200 platform (TP=4) and the H100 platform (TP=2). Table III summarizes the minimum and maximum T-CCL speedups over NCCL and symmetric NCCL for each collective. Overall, T-CCL out-performs both baselines across most evaluated message sizes. The few regressions are small and occur primarily for small-message cases on the H100 platform. Symmetric NCCL, however, shows mixed results compared with standard NCCL. We observe that symmetric NCCL uses a conservative CTA configuration for AllReduce. In particular, it uses at most eight CTAs even as the message size increases. As a result, it can perform worse than standard NCCL, which scales its CTA usage more aggressively with message size and uses more of the available communication resources. The same behavior is not observed for ReduceScatter and AllGather, for which symmetric NCCL also increases its CTA usage as the message size grows. 

b) SM resource usage: Although CTA count does not directly determine SM usage, it bounds the number of SMs that a communication kernel can occupy because multiple CTAs may be scheduled on the same SM. We therefore directly profile the average SM usage of T-CCL, NCCL, symmetric NCCL, and NCCL with TMA enabled (denoted as TMA NCCL ) on the GH200 platform. While the standard and symmetric NCCL baselines use NCCL 2.28, for TMA NCCL we use NCCL 2.30.7 and apply a small patch to enable its TMA path on the Hopper architecture. We profile six message sizes for both AllGather and ReduceScatter, including two small messages and four large messages. Using Nsight Systems [16], we measure the average number of active SMs                      

> TABLE IV T-CCL SPEEDUP RANGES OVER NCCL AND SYMMETRIC NCCL ACROSS LATENCY AND BANDWIDTH MEASUREMENTS UNDER RESTRICTED CTA
> BUDGETS .
> Platform Collective vs. NCCL vs. Sym. NCCL H100 AllReduce 0.94–2.74 ×0.96–1.46 ×
> ReduceScatter 0.95–3.42 ×0.98–1.54 ×
> AllGather 0.98–3.35 ×0.99–1.21 ×
> GH200 AllReduce 1.15–3.26 ×1.11–1.84 ×
> ReduceScatter 1.60–2.88 ×1.18–2.09 ×
> AllGather 1.24–2.83 ×0.98–1.98 ×

over 1,000 iterations. Table I shows that T-CCL uses fewer than or the same number of SMs as the other configurations while generally achieving higher performance. Another notable observation is that TMA NCCL performs worse than T-CCL in all evaluated cases and is also slower than symmetric NCCL in most experiments. We attribute this result to three aspects of NCCL’s current use of TMA in collective operations. First, NCCL primarily uses TMA for loading and storing data, while reductions continue to be performed by a large number of GPU threads. Because reduction is one of the most demanding components of collective communication, using TMA only for data movement leaves much of its potential benefit unexploited. Second, NCCL waits for each TMA load or store to complete before continuing. T-CCL in-stead pipelines multiple TMA operations to hide their latency and improve throughput. Third, NCCL processes loads from multiple peers within a single CTA. Progress can therefore be limited by the slowest or most contended peer link, leaving the TMA hardware underutilized. T-CCL assigns work associated with different peers to separate CTAs, allowing transfers from uncontended peers to proceed independently. 

c) Restricted CTA Budgets: Fig. 4 shows the perfor-mance of T-CCL, NCCL, and symmetric NCCL under re-stricted CTA budgets of 8 CTAs on the H100 platform and 9 CTAs on the GH200 platform. Under these constraints, T-CCL maintains higher bandwidth than both NCCL configurations across the evaluated large-message sizes. Table IV summarizes the minimum and maximum T-CCL speedups over NCCL and symmetric NCCL for each collective. Overall, T-CCL outperforms both baselines across most evaluated message sizes, with only a few small regressions for small-message cases on the H100 platform. Symmetric NCCL also retains its performance better than standard NCCL under restricted CTA budgets, consistent with the conservative CTA usage we observe in the unrestricted set-ting. Consequently, restricting the CTA budget affects standard NCCL more severely. 

C. Case Study: Improving Compute–Communication Overlap 

We conduct a case study to evaluate T-CCL when GEMM and collective communication execute concurrently. We con-sider this setting because GEMM and collective communica-tion frequently occur together in tensor-parallel transformer layers, and it allows us to assess whether T-CCL can fur-Fig. 4. Collective-operation performance under restricted CTA budgets, with communication limited to 8 CTAs on the H100 platform and 9 CTAs on the GH200 platform. Rows correspond to AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather. The first two columns report latency and bandwidth for TP=2, while the last two columns report latency and bandwidth for TP=4.  

> Fig. 5. Average speedup of FlashOverlap using NCCL and T-CCL for TP=2 and TP=4. For each TP configuration, speedup is measured relative to its corresponding sequential cuBLAS–NCCL baseline. Bars show the average across 24 GEMM shapes, while the markers indicate the minimum and maximum speedups.

ther hide communication latency while limiting interference with computation. Rather than waiting for the entire GEMM operation to finish, partial GEMM results are communicated as soon as they become ready while the remaining portions are still being computed. The size of each communicated segment, and therefore the granularity of overlap, is deter-mined by the overlap algorithm and its configuration. We use FlashOverlap [17] as the overlap framework. FlashOverlap tracks GEMM output completion at tile granularity and groups completed tiles into contiguous regions that can be communi-cated before the GEMM finishes. Its signaling and reordering mechanisms keep the GEMM and collective communication kernels separate. This separation allows the same GEMM im-plementation and overlap schedule to be paired with different communication backends, enabling a controlled comparison between NCCL and T-CCL. The original FlashOverlap imple-mentation targeted pre-Hopper GPUs and used CUTLASS 2.x-style APIs [17], [18]. We ported FlashOverlap to the Hopper architecture and CUTLASS 3.x APIs. 

a) Configuration settings: We compare three configura-tions: cuBLAS [19] followed by NCCL, representing sequen-tial GEMM and communication (denoted as the cuBLAS– NCCL baseline), and FlashOverlap using either NCCL or T-CCL as its communication backend (the NCCL variant and the T-CCL variant, respectively). We report the average speedup of the two FlashOverlap configurations over the sequential baseline across 24 GEMM shapes, with M × N ranging from 

64 × 1024 2 to 384 × 1024 2 and K ∈ { 2048 , 4096 , 8192 }.(a) Conversation workload: 1024 input tokens and 128 output tokens. (b) Decode-heavy workload: 512 input tokens and 1024 output tokens. Fig. 6. Throughput measurements for the conversation and decode-heavy vLLM workloads using the Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct model with TP=4 on the GH200 platform. Results are shown for vLLM Auto, NCCL, and T-CCL. Labels above the T-CCL bars indicate speedup relative to vLLM Auto. 

We evaluate FlashOverlap configurations with both TP=2 and TP=4 on the GH200 platform to maintain a consistent hardware environment, as the H100 and GH200 platforms have different numbers of SMs. FlashOverlap communicates partial GEMM results in groups of output tiles. To maximize overlap, it uses a search algorithm to select the best group size based on the available communication resources (CTAs) and the bandwidth of the communication backend [17]. Therefore, for TP=2, we provide CTA budgets of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 16 as the available communication resources for both T-CCL and NCCL. For TP=4, we provide CTA budgets of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 24. We evaluate all configurations considered by the search algorithm and select the one with the lowest execution time. 

b) Overlap speedup: Fig. 5 shows the average speedup of FlashOverlap with NCCL and T-CCL relative to the sequential baseline (cuBLAS–NCCL), together with the minimum and maximum speedups observed across the 24 GEMM shapes. Overlap improves performance in both settings. For TP=2, the NCCL and T-CCL variants achieve average speedups of 1.12 ×

and 1.25 ×, respectively, with the T-CCL variant reaching up to 1.51 × for the shapes that offer the most computation to overlap. For TP=4, they achieve 1.04 × and 1.14 ×, with a maximum of 1.34 × for the T-CCL variant. In both cases, T-CCL provides a higher average speedup because its smaller SM-side resource footprint leaves more resources available for GEMM computation. For TP=2, our T-CCL variant maintains a speedup above the sequential baseline across all 24 GEMM shapes, whereas the NCCL variant falls below the baseline in its worst case. For TP=4, where each GPU holds a smaller share of computation, both variants exhibit minimum speedups below the sequential baseline. These worst cases generally occur for smaller values of M , N , and K: small GEMMs provide little computation with which to overlap communication, so the configuration selected by FlashOverlap’s predictive search may perform worse than simply running GEMM and communication se-quentially. The remaining shapes retain a speedup above the sequential baseline, with the largest gains on compute-rich shapes. Overall, these results indicate that in overlap scenarios, the small resource footprint of T-CCL makes it a promising communication backend, delivering higher average speedup than NCCL at both TP degrees. 

D. Case Study: Improving LLM Inference Performance 

We next evaluate T-CCL in an LLM inference setting to determine whether its communication-level improvements also translate into higher end-to-end inference performance. We use vLLM [20] and integrate T-CCL as a communication backend supporting AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather. We compare three configurations: vLLM Auto , which retains vLLM’s built-in communication dispatch among its custom AllReduce, NCCL with symmetric memory, and standard NCCL; NCCL , in which the evaluated collectives are forced to use NCCL; and T-CCL , in which they use T-CCL. All experiments use the Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct model [21] with TP=4 on the GH200 platform. We run all experiments using vLLM’s internal benchmark-ing utility [20] with CUDA Graph execution disabled (i.e., in eager mode), since T-CCL does not currently support CUDA Graph execution. CUDA Graphs reduce repeated host-side launch overhead by replaying captured GPU operations [3]. We therefore expect T-CCL to benefit from CUDA Graph sup-port, as part of its collective planning and launch orchestration is performed on the host. NCCL similarly benefits from graph execution because it also incurs host-side launch overhead, while the GPU-side communication differences between T-CCL and NCCL remain. We leave the development of CUDA Graph support for T-CCL and its end-to-end evaluation in vLLM to future work. We evaluate two workloads. The first uses an input length of 1024 tokens and an output length of 128 tokens, closely matching the median input and output lengths observed in a production LLM conversation trace [22]. The second uses input and output lengths of 512 and 1024 tokens, respec-tively, representing a decode-heavy workload [23]. For both workloads, we vary the maximum number of active sequences (batch size) from 1 to 64 and report end-to-end output through-put. Fig. 6(a) and 6(b) present the results. For the conversation workload, T-CCL achieves geometric-mean speedups of 1.10 ×

over vLLM Auto and 1.17 × over NCCL across the evaluated settings, while outperforming both configurations in every case and reaching up to 1.22 × over vLLM Auto. For the decode-heavy workload, T-CCL achieves geometric-mean speedups of 1.15 × over both vLLM Auto and NCCL, again outper-forming both configurations throughout the evaluation, with a maximum speedup of 1.31 × over vLLM Auto. The larger speedup over vLLM Auto on the decode-heavy workload comes from the longer output sequence, which requires more decode iterations and repeated collective invocations. These re-sults show that the communication-level advantages of T-CCL can translate into higher end-to-end inference throughput for both representative conversation and decode-heavy inference workloads. V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented T-CCL, a TMA-based collective com-munication library for intra-node GPU systems. T-CCL of-floads the data movement and reduction operations required by collectives to TMA. It translates AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather into a series of logical tasks, while each rank lowers these tasks into physical transfer operations that are ef-ficiently executed by a pipelined TMA engine. Our evaluation showed that T-CCL generally achieves higher performance than NCCL with lower resource usage. Two case studies demonstrated the practical benefits of T-CCL: in compute– communication overlap, the SM resources freed by T-CCL yield greater overlap speedup, and integrating T-CCL into vLLM translates its gains on individual collectives into higher end-to-end inference throughput. For future work, we plan to support window-level com-pletion signaling to more closely pipeline dependent copy and reduction operations. We will also extend T-CCL to support All-to-All for mixture-of-experts workloads, where communication patterns and resource demands can vary dy-namically across GPUs. Finally, we plan to evaluate T-CCL on larger GPU topologies, such as 8- and 16-GPU systems, and investigate topology-aware planning for asymmetric systems, where GPUs may be connected through interconnects with heterogeneous bandwidth and latency characteristics. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF) under the PRIDE project (ref. no. CHI19-0048) and the Swedish Research Council (VR) under the P4PIM project (grant ID 2020-04892). Computational resources were provided by the National Academic Infrastruc-ture for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS), under project No. 2026/4-335, funded by the Swedish Research Council. The computations were also enabled by resources provided by Chalmers e-Commons at Chalmers. Throughout the writing of this paper, across all sections, the authors used Grammarly [24] and ChatGPT [25] to improve the clarity of the paper. This included grammar and vocab-ulary checking, as well as paraphrasing sentences originally written by the authors. The authors then reviewed, edited, and rephrased the suggested sentences in their own words. Therefore, the authors take full responsibility for the content of the paper. REFERENCES [1] NVIDIA, “Megatron bridge parallelisms guide,” https://docs.nvidia.com/ nemo/megatron-bridge/latest/parallelisms.html, 2026. [2] ——, “NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) Documen-tation,” https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/nccl/user-guide/docs/index. html, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-28. [3] ——, “CUDA C++ Programming Guide,” https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/ cuda-programming-guide/, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-31. [4] ——, “Parallel Thread Execution ISA Documentation,” https://docs. nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-28. [5] Z. Hu, S. Shen, T. Bonato, S. Jeaugey, C. Alexander, E. Spada, J. Dinan, J. Hammond, and T. Hoefler, “Demystifying NCCL: An in-depth analysis of GPU communication protocols and algorithms,”                                                                                                                                                               

> arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04786 ,2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2507.04786 [6] M. Cowan, S. Maleki, M. Musuvathi, O. Saarikivi, and Y. Xiong, “MSCCL: Microsoft collective communication library,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11840 , 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201. 11840 [7] C. Hwang, P. Cheng, R. Dathathri, A. Jangda, S. Maleki, M. Musuvathi, O. Saarikivi, A. Shah, Z. Yang, B. Li, C. Rocha, Q. Zhou, M. Ghazimirsaeed, S. Anantharamu, and J. Jose, “MSCCL++: Rethinking GPU communication abstractions for AI inference,” in
> Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems ,ser. ASPLOS ’26, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 09014 [8] NVIDIA, “NVSHMEM Documentation,” https://docs.nvidia.com/ nvshmem/, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-28. [9] T. Liu, C. Hei, F. Li, C. Gao, J. Cao, T. Wang, E. Zhai, and X. Wang, “ResCCL: Resource-efficient scheduling for collective communication,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference ,ser. SIGCOMM ’25, 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3718958.3750514 [10] M. Zhang, X. Hu, M. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Jia, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, Q. Chen, F. Jiao, J. Chen, H. Liu, A. Zeng, S. Duan, R. Gu, Y. Jing, B. Han, W. Chen, W. Xie, J. Hou, Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, B. Xu, M. Xu, and C. Hu, “An efficient, reliable and observable collective communication library in large-scale GPU training clusters,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.00991 [11] S. Pati, S. Aga, M. Islam, N. Jayasena, and M. D. Sinclair, “T3: Transparent tracking &triggering for fine-grained overlap of compute &collectives,” in Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2401.16677 [12] B. F. Spector, S. Arora, A. Singhal, D. Y. Fu, and C. R´ e, “ThunderKittens: Simple, fast, and adorable AI kernels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20399 , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410. 20399 [13] S. H. Sul, S. Arora, B. F. Spector, and C. R´ e, “ParallelKittens: Systematic and practical simplification of Multi-GPU AI kernels,”
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13940 ,2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2511.13940 [14] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA Hopper Tuning Guide,” https://docs.nvidia.com/ cuda/hopper-tuning-guide/, 2026, accessed: 2026-07-26. [15] NVIDIA Corporation, “NCCL Tests,” https://github.com/NVIDIA/ nccl-tests, accessed: Sep. 16, 2026.

[16] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA Nsight Systems,” https://docs.nvidia.com/ nsight-systems/, accessed: 2026-08-07. [17] K. Hong, X. Li, M. Liu, Q. Mao, T. Wu, Z. Huang, L. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhu, G. Dai, and Y. Wang, “Efficient and adaptable overlapping for computation and communication via signaling and reordering,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Systems , ser. EuroSys ’26, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19519 [18] NVIDIA, “CUTLASS 3.0 GEMM API,” https://docs.nvidia.com/cutlass/ media/docs/cpp/gemm api 3x.html, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-28. [19] ——, “cuBLAS: Basic linear algebra on NVIDIA GPUs,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://developer.nvidia.com/cublas [20] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. E. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient memory management for large language model serving with PagedAttention,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180 [21] A. Yang, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Li, D. Liu, F. Huang, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Lu, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, M. Li, M. Xue, P. Zhang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Lin, T. Li, T. Tang, T. Xia, X. Ren, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, and Z. Qiu, “Qwen2.5 technical report,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 [22] P. Patel, E. Choukse, C. Zhang, A. Shah, ´ I˜ nigo Goiri, S. Maleki, and R. Bianchini, “Splitwise: Efficient generative LLM inference using phase splitting,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18677 [23] K. Zhu, Y. Gao, Y. Zhao, L. Zhao, G. Zuo, Y. Gu, D. Xie, T. Tang, Q. Xu, Z. Ye, K. Kamahori, C.-Y. Lin, Z. Wang, S. Wang, A. Krishnamurthy, and B. Kasikci, “NanoFlow: Towards optimal large language model serving throughput,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12757 [24] Grammarly, “Grammarly,” https://www.grammarly.com/, 2026, ac-cessed: 2026-08-08. [25] OpenAI, “ChatGPT,” https://chatgpt.com/, 2026, accessed: 2026-08-08. Artifact Description (AD) 

APPENDIX AOVERVIEW OF CONTRIBUTIONS AND ARTIFACTS 

A. Paper’s Main Contributions 

C1 We design and implement T-CCL, an intra-node collective communication library that uses the Tensor Memory Accelerator for communication and reduc-tion between GPUs. T-CCL supports AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather. 

C2 We evaluate T-CCL against NCCL and symmetric NCCL for intra-node collective communication. We characterize its performance under unrestricted and restricted CTA budgets. 

C3 We evaluate T-CCL’s performance benefits in a fine-grained compute–communication overlap setting us-ing FlashOverlap. 

C4 We integrate T-CCL into vLLM as a tensor-parallel communication backend and evaluate its effect on end-to-end LLM inference throughput. 

B. Computational Artifacts 

A1 The T-CCL artifact package contains the source code, build system, environment setup scripts, benchmark drivers, experiment configurations, raw-result pro-cessing tools, and plotting scripts. The artifact is available at: https://github.com/ooverlap/ooverlap Artifact branch: anonymouse .Artifact version: 9abd9cf .APPENDIX BARTIFACT IDENTIFICATION 

A. Computational Artifact A1

Relation To Contributions 

Artifact A1 supports contributions C1–C4.For C1, the artifact contains the complete T-CCL imple-mentation and the scripts required to configure, build, and test its AllReduce, ReduceScatter, and AllGather operations. For C2, the artifact contains the benchmark drivers, ex-periment configurations, result-processing tools, and plotting scripts used for the standalone collective evaluation. For C3, the artifact contains the ported FlashOverlap source code, together with the scripts for running and plotting the compute–communication overlap experiments. For C4, the artifact contains the T-CCL integration for vLLM and the scripts used to execute and analyze the tensor-parallel inference experiments. 

Expected Results 

Successful reproduction of the standalone collective exper-iments should generate latency and algorithmic bandwidth measurements for T-CCL, NCCL, and NCCL’s symmetric-memory kernels under unrestricted and restricted CTA bud-gets. These results support C2 by reproducing the collective-performance trends reported in the paper. Successful reproduction of the overlap experiments should generate execution-time and speedup results for the sequential cuBLAS–NCCL baseline and FlashOverlap using NCCL or T-CCL. These results support C3 by reproducing the perfor-mance benefit of T-CCL in compute–communication overlap. Successful reproduction of the vLLM experiments should generate output-throughput measurements for vLLM Auto, NCCL, and T-CCL across the evaluated maximum numbers of active sequences. These results support C4 by reproducing the end-to-end inference throughput improvements reported in the paper. The reproduced results should exhibit the same general performance trends as Figs. 3–6 and Tables I, III, and IV. Exact execution times may differ because of GPU clocks, machine topology, thermal conditions, and system load. 

Expected Reproduction Time (in Minutes) 

The approximate reproduction times are:  

> •

Artifact setup and compilation: approximately 10 min-utes . 

> •

Artifact execution: approximately 20 minutes for the complete standalone collective evaluation, approximately 

300 minutes per TP configuration for the compute– communication overlap evaluation, and approximately 

360 minutes for the vLLM evaluation.  

> •

Artifact analysis and plot generation are performed au-tomatically by the evaluation scripts and are included in the execution times above. Execution times may vary depending on the hardware, system load, and software environment. 

Artifact Setup (incl. Inputs) Hardware: The paper evaluates T-CCL on the following systems:  

> •

A two-GPU system containing two NVIDIA H100 NVL GPUs, connected through NV12.  

> •

A four-GPU system containing four NVIDIA GH200 120-GB GPUs, connected through NV6. The implementation targets NVIDIA Hopper GPUs with SM90 support. It should require only minor build changes for newer NVIDIA GPUs with TMA support. Reproducing the reported performance requires hardware and interconnects similar to the evaluated systems. 

Software: The principal software dependencies and versions are:  

> •

Linux kernel 5.14.0-687.26.1.el9_8.aarch64+64k 

on the GH200 system and 

5.14.0-687.30.1.el9_8.0.1.x86_64 on the H100 system.  

> •

NVIDIA driver 580.159.04 on the GH200 system and 595.71.05 on the H100 system https://www.nvidia.com/ Download/index.aspx .TABLE V RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PAPER ’S CONTRIBUTIONS , COMPUTATIONAL ARTIFACTS , AND PAPER ELEMENTS SUPPORTED BY THE ARTIFACT .

Artifact Contributions Paper elements supported by the artifact 

A1 C1 T-CCL implementation and system design described in Section III and illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2. 

A1 C2 Standalone collective evaluation in Section IV-B, including Figs. 3–4 and the corresponding performance and SM-usage tables. 

A1 C3 Compute–communication overlap evaluation using FlashOverlap in Section IV-C, including Fig. 5. 

A1 C4 vLLM integration and end-to-end inference evaluation in Section IV-D, including Fig. 6.  

> •

CUDA Toolkit 13.0 on the GH200 system and CUDA Toolkit 13.3 on the H100 system https://developer.nvidia.com/ cuda-toolkit-archive . 

> •

NVIDIA Nsight Systems 2025.3.2.  

> •

NCCL 2.28 https://github.com/NVIDIA/nccl/releases/tag/v2.28.9-1 . 

> •

NCCL 2.30.7 https://github.com/NVIDIA/nccl/releases/tag/v2.30. 7-1 with an artifact-provided patch enabling the TMA path on Hopper for the SM-usage experiments.  

> •

CMake 4.4.0 https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v4.4/release/4.4.html . 

> •

GCC 14.3.0 https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-14/ . 

> •

Python 3.12 or newer (Python 3.13.5 was used on both systems; https://www.python.org/ ).  

> •

PyTorch 2.11.0+cu130 https://pytorch.org/get-started/ previous-versions/ . 

> •

vLLM 0.25.0 https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/releases/tag/v0. 25.0 with an artifact-provided patch for T-CCL integration, applied automatically during setup.  

> •

CUTLASS 3.9.0 https://github.com/NVIDIA/cutlass/releases/tag/ v3.9.0 with an artifact-provided patch for the FlashOverlap evaluation, applied automatically during setup. 

Datasets / Inputs: The standalone collective experiments use synthetically generated GPU buffers and do not require an external dataset. The compute–communication overlap experiments require no external dataset. They use synthetically generated FP16 input matrices, while the matrix dimensions, communication configurations, and evaluation parameters are defined by the artifact. The vLLM experiments use the built-in random-data bench-mark to generate synthetic prompts. All vLLM experi-ments use the Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct model with tensor-parallel size four. The exact model revision is 

> 495f39366efef23836d0cfae4fbe635880d2be31

.The evaluated workloads are:  

> •

Conversation workload: 1024 input tokens and 128 output tokens.  

> •

Decode-heavy workload: 512 input tokens and 1024 output tokens.  

> •

Maximum active sequences: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64. 

Installation and Deployment: The artifact must be cloned with all Git submodules:    

> git clone --recursive https://github.com/ooverlap/ooverlap cd ooverlap/

The artifact provides separate setup scripts for the two evaluated platforms:         

> bash setup_env.sh [venv-path] #H100/x86 bash setup_arm_env.sh [venv-path] #GH200/ARM

By default, the scripts load the site-specific environment modules used on the evaluated systems. On machines with an equivalent compiler and CUDA toolchain, module loading can be disabled and a custom virtual-environment location can be specified:    

> SKIP_MODULES=1 bash setup_env.sh /path/to/venv

This module-independent setup has been validated on x86 systems but has not yet been validated on ARM systems. The scripts install the required Python packages, configure the patched CUTLASS dependency, apply the vLLM integration patch, and build T-CCL and its PyTorch extension. After setup, the script prints the path of a generated en-vironment file. This file must be sourced before running the evaluation:  

> source /path/to/ooverlap_vllm_env.sh

Artifact Execution 

All workflows require T-CCL and its Python extensions to be built beforehand, and the generated runtime-environment file to be sourced. The three workflows can then be exe-cuted independently. Optional tuning T0 produces the launch-configuration data used by T-CCL. The standalone collective workflow consists of T1 and TSM , the overlap workflow consists of T2 → T3, and the vLLM workflow consists of 

T4 → T5.

a) Optional T-CCL Tuning: 

T0 From the T-CCL repository root, run:    

> python3 test/sweep_tma_collectives.py \--devices <device-list>

The device list must contain either two or four GPU device identifiers, corresponding to TP=2 or TP=4, respectively. This script evaluates different T-CCL launch configurations and generates the tuning results. This step is not required to run the evaluation workflows below. 

b) Standalone Collective Evaluation: 

T1 Run:   

> cd evalution ./run_external_p2p_bandwidth_latency.sh <tp> <mode>

The first argument is either 2 or 4. The second argument is either unres for the unrestricted CTA configuration or res for the restricted CTA con-figuration. Run all four combinations to reproduce the complete standalone evaluation. Each invocation automatically generates the corresponding plots and reports the minimum and maximum T-CCL speedups over NCCL and symmetric NCCL for both the small-and large-message ranges across all collectives. 

TSM To measure the average active SM usage, run:      

> cd evalution ./run_external_p2p_sm_usage.sh <tp> <op> <numel> [<numel> ...]

The first argument is either 2 or 4, corresponding to TP=2 or TP=4. The second argument specifies the collective operation: AG for AllGather, RS for ReduceScatter, or AR for AllReduce. The remaining arguments specify one or more tensor sizes as num-bers of elements. The script measures and reports the average active SM usage of T-CCL, NCCL, symmetric NCCL, and NCCL with TMA enabled for each specified tensor size. 

c) Compute–Communication Overlap Evaluation: 

T2 Build the patched CUTLASS profiler, copy 

scripts/sweep_h100_dense_f16_gemm_ same_grid.sh into the CUTLASS profiler directory, and run it to generate the required GEMM profile CSV files. 

T3 From the T-CCL repository root, run:   

> cd evalution ./run_flashoverlap_sm90.sh <tp>

The argument is either 2 or 4. The script runs the overlap evaluation and automatically generates the plots. 

d) vLLM Evaluation: 

T4 Download the model revision specified above and record its local path. 

T5 Run the vLLM evaluation with tensor-parallel size four:     

> cd evalution VLLM_MODEL_DIR=/path/to/model \./run_vllm_paperlike.sh 4run

The script runs both the conversation and decode-heavy workloads and automatically generates their corresponding plots. 

Artifact Analysis (incl. Outputs) 

The standalone collective analysis calculates latency for small messages and algorithmic bandwidth for large messages. Results are grouped by collective operation, system, message size, communication backend, and CTA budget. The overlap analysis compares the execution time of FlashOverlap with NCCL or T-CCL against the sequential cuBLAS–NCCL baseline and calculates the resulting speedup. The vLLM analysis groups successful runs by workload, communication backend, and maximum number of active sequences (batch size). It then computes output-token through-put and the relative speedup of T-CCL over the evaluated baselines. All reproduced plots are generated in PNG or PDF format.