Title: Fast and Memory Efficient Offload Training Framework with Hybrid XPU Computation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.09657v1

Published Time: Thu, 08 Oct 2026 00:57:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Fast and Memory Efficient Offload Training Framework with Hybrid XPU Computation 

Zhiyi Yao, Zuning Liang, Yuedong Xu, Jin Zhao, Jessie Hui Wang, Tong Li 

Abstract —With the ever-growing size of deep learning models, GPU memory is prone to being insufficient during training. A prominent approach is ZeRO-Offload, which moves the optimizer states to CPU memory and performs parameter update using CPU. However, the deficiencies of ZeRO-Offload include low GPU utilization, imperfect overlapping of communication and computation, and inflexible offloading. In this paper, we leverage Direct Host Access (DHA) on the GPU that can compute data in CPU memory, forming a novel hybrid on-GPU and DHA. We design and implement MemFerry consisting of an execution scheduler and a shadow model. The scheduler strategically chooses layers of parameters for DHA computation and transmits the remaining parameters to GPU memory simultaneously to shorten forward propagation time, and further loads DHA parameters to GPU memory to reduce backward propagation time. The shadow model presents a unified memory abstraction for the parameter partitions stored separately in GPU and CPU memories. To further reduce GPU memory usage, we present GO-MemFerry along with its dynamic programming algorithm that offloads gradients to CPU memory via DHA. We further extend MemFerry to emerging scale-up domains with ScaleUp-MemFerry, which exploits otherwise underutilized accelerator in-terconnect bandwidth to assist host-to-accelerator data movement through adaptive multi-path transfer. Our experiments show that MemFerry trains up to 1.68 × faster and GO-MemFerry can train 

1.52 × larger model compared to ZeRO-Offload on a single GPU, and increase training speed by at least 28 .1% when scaling to data parallelism on 8 GPUs. We further extend the design to a Huawei CloudMatrix384 scale-Up node with up to 8 NPUs, and our ScaleUp-MemFerry reduces the end-to-end iteration time by up to 20.7% over DeepSpeed. 

Index Terms —Offloaded training, CPU offloading, Direct-host-access, Communication scheduling, GPU/NPU 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

With the penetration of large-scale deep learning such as ChatGPT (GPT-3.5 and GPT-4) [1] in our daily life and pro-duction activities, how to train deep learning models efficiently has attracted great interest. In recent years, the size of deep learning models has increased rapidly. For instance, BERT-base [2] developed in 2018 contains 110 million parameters, while one year after GPT-2 [3] contains 1.5 Billion parameters, and today’s LLaMA [4] and GPT-3 [5] contain 65 Billion and 175 Billion parameters, respectively. However, GPU as the mainstream computing accelerator, have very limited device memory. The latest Nvidia A100, H100 and H800 have 80 G

Bytes of high-bandwidth memory (HBM), and the frequently 

Manuscript created November, 2026. Zhiyi Yao and Zuning Liang are with College of Future Information Technology, Fudan University; Jessie Hui Wang is with Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University; Tong Li is with School of Information, Renmin University of China; Yuedong Xu and Jin Zhao are with College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University (e-mail: ydxu@fudan.edu.cn). 

used V100 has only 32 G Bytes of memory. This imposes a significant challenge on large-scale model training. To reduce GPU memory requirements, two key technical routines have surfaced. One is to segment the parameters, gradients, optimizer states and activations (also called training content) across multiple GPUs, such as ZeRO [6] for data par-allelism (DP) and GPipe [7] for pipeline parallelism. The other is offload training [8]–[11]. The basic idea is to move partial training content from GPU memory to CPU memory [12], which is usually an order of magnitude larger, or even to secondary storage [13], [14]. However, accommodating larger models comes at the cost of reduced training speed. The most widely used offload training system is ZeRO-Offload [11]. In ZeRO-Offload, the optimizer states are placed in CPU memory and parameter updates are performed by the CPU, while regu-lar forward propagation (FP) and backward propagation (BP) are executed on the GPU. Therefore, in each iteration, updated parameters are transferred to GPU memory for FP, and the resulting gradients are returned to CPU memory for parameter updates. The limited bandwidth between CPU and GPU thus throttles effective GPU utilization. Meanwhile, this bottleneck becomes more pronounced in emerging scale-up domains, where accelerator-to-accelerator connectivity is substantially enhanced while host-to-accelerator data movement remains comparatively constrained, leaving part of the high-bandwidth scale-up fabric underutilized during offload training [15]–[18]. In this paper, we conduct a preliminary evaluation on the DeepSpeed implementation of ZeRO-Offload with three key observations. (1) GPU streaming processors (SMs) are severely under-utilized compared to non-offloading (e.g. 63% vs 99% in BERT-base on Nvidia A100). (2) Communication and computation are not well overlapped. The GPU idleness becomes prominent when the parameters are enormous and unbalancedly distributed on different layers. (3) The memory offloading is not flexible, especially that no further training content can be moved to CPU memory. Hence, we raise a critical question: “Does there exist a new or improved training paradigm that can achieve higher training speed over ZeRO-Offload and reduce GPU memory usage at the same time?” We propose to integrate the Direct-Host-Access (DHA) functionality provided by mainstream GPUs in offload train-ing. With DHA, GPU SMs access data in CPU memory, bypassing CPU cores and GPU memory. DeepPlan [19] is the first work to introduce DHA into model inference . Inspired by this, we evaluate the FP and BP times under the on-GPU and DHA execution modes of offload training. In FP, DHA outperforms on-GPU on certain large layers considerably. In BP, DHA is inferior to on-GPUs if the resulting gradients are arXiv:2610.09657v1 [cs.DC] 7 Oct 2026 2

stored in GPU memory, but their gaps are greatly reduced if the gradient transmission times of on-GPU are considered. Therefore, fusing on-GPU and DHA into a novel hybrid training paradigm has the potential to achieve our objectives. We design MemFerry, a novel hybrid training framework that exploits the benefits of DHA in FP while mitigating its side effects in BP as much as possible. MemFerry consists of an execution scheduler and a shadow model . The execution scheduler leverages DHA to compute selected layers while loading the remaining parameters into GPU memory during FP, thereby overlapping communication with computation. During the interval between the completion of parameter loading and the beginning of gradient transmission, MemFerry further loads selected DHA parameters into GPU memory to reduce their BP time. By mitigating communication bub-bles in both FP and BP, MemFerry reduces the per-iteration training time. The shadow model provides a unified memory abstraction for three parameter partitions spanning CPU and GPU memories: DHA parameters that remain in CPU memory, GFGB (GPU-FP-GPU-BP) parameters that are computed in GPU memory, and DFGB (DHA-FP-GPU-BP) parameters that are computed via DHA during FP but transferred to GPU memory for more efficient BP. Through dynamic address mapping, the GPU can transparently access these parameter partitions without additional CPU-side data copies. To achieve flexible GPU memory offloading, we propose GO-MemFerry that uses DHA to write gradients directly to CPU memory, thus further reducing GPU memory usage. To the best of our knowledge, gradient offloading by DHA has not been reported before. With the user-specified gradient reserving factor, we model the optimal gradient offloading as a dynamic programming problem so as to minimize its impact on the training speed. With GO-MemFerry, we are able to train even larger models and balance the tradeoff between fast training speed and low GPU memory usage. We further adapt MemFerry to emerging scale-up domains by exploiting otherwise underutilized accelerator intercon-nect bandwidth to assist CPU-to-accelerator data movement. ScaleUp-MemFerry combines an additional assisted transfer path with an adaptive data dispatcher that partitions data across the direct and assisted paths according to their latency and bandwidth characteristics. The evaluation results on clusters equipped with NVIDIA V100 and A100 GPUs show that MemFerry achieves both faster training and lower GPU memory usage than state-of-the-art offload training systems. MemFerry improves train-ing speed by 1.32 × on average and up to 1.68 ×, while increasing GPU utilization by up to 1.27 ×. MemFerry also reduces GPU memory usage by up to 61.7%. With gradient offloading, GO-MemFerry reduces memory usage by 20.1% on average and up to 74.4%, enabling the training of models up to 1.52 × larger than those supported by ZeRO-Offload. MemFerry is also scalable to distributed training, achieving at least 1.28 × speedup when integrated with data parallelism on eight GPUs. Finally, on a CloudMatrix384 scale-up node, ScaleUp-MemFerry further reduces the end-to-end iteration time by up to 20.7% over DeepSpeed and 4.0% over the original MemFerry.  

> Fig. 1. Training process of ZeRO-Offload.

II. B ACKGROUND 

A. Memory Usage of DNN Training 

We first investigate the memory usage of standard DL training on the premise of sufficient GPU High Bandwidth Memory (HBM). All the involved data is usually in the form of tensors. The data that needs to be maintained on GPU memory (interchangeable with GPU HBM) during training includes: 1) Parameters. Before the training starts, the parameters of a model need to be loaded into GPU memory. This memory usage is exactly the model size. 2) Gradients. During the backward propagation (BP) stage, the DL framework will generate gradient tensors of the same size as the parameters on the GPU memory. 3) Optimizer States. Optimization algorithms in DL usually rely on first-order and second-order momentum to accelerate convergence. For example, the opti-mizer states of Adam [20] include momentum and variance, each of which is two times the model size. 4) Activations. 

The activations include the intermediate computing results of each model layer and the loss during BP. If the model input is complex, especially in large language models, activations will occupy a large portion of GPU memory. Fortunately, the recomputation [21] technique discards intermediate activations when the computation completes so that only the peak size of activations is counted. 

B. ZeRO-Offload Training Paradigm 

To reduce GPU memory requirement, ZeRO-Offload [11] presents a new training framework that uses CPU memory to supplement the limited GPU memory. The core idea of ZeRO-offload is to offload the expensive optimizer states and corresponding update computation to CPU. ZeRO-Offload is officially implemented in DeepSpeed [22], and its training process is shown in Figure 1. Before the training starts, the training system stores model parameters and optimizer states in CPU memory, and allocates space for computation in GPU memory. At the beginning of each iteration, CPU explicitly copies the latest model param-eters from CPU memory to GPU memory and then performs forward and backward computations on GPU. During the BP process, the gradients will be asynchronously transferred to the CPU memory for model update. Once the BP process is finished, the optimizer updates the parameters in the CPU. In this way, the GPU memory consumption of model training is reduced to the size of activation, parameters, and gradients. The processing of parameters on the CPU is inefficient because the CPU sequential execution mode is often adopted in deep learning frameworks. The model parameters are phys-ically stored at different parts of the CPU memory such that 3

the parallel processing of them is hard. In view of this, ZeRO-Offload merges all model parameters into a continuous ”long” parameter tensor that is stored in a contiguous space. Then, ZeRO-Offload develops the CPU-Adam optimization tech-nique by leveraging SIMD on the aggregated tensor-vector. The parallel computing capability of CPU enables ZeRO-Offload to compute more efficiently in the model update. 

C. Scale-up networks 

Scale-up networks have recently emerged as an important architectural trend for large-scale AI systems. Traditional GPU clusters are organized around a scale-out design, where a small group of accelerators within one server are connected by high-bandwidth local links, while communication across servers relies on commodity RNICs and multi-tier Ethernet or Infini-Band fabrics [23], [24]. This hierarchy works well when cross-node traffic is relatively modest, but it becomes increasingly inefficient for modern foundation-model workloads. Once data transfers cross the server boundary, they are exposed to lower bandwidth, higher latency, and CPU-mediated control paths, which limit both scalability and hardware utilization. Scale-up networks address this limitation by extending high-bandwidth accelerator interconnects beyond a single server and building a larger tightly-coupled domain at rack or supernode scale. Within such a domain, tens to hundreds of accelerators can communicate through direct accelerator-centric paths rather than through the conventional host-centric hierarchy [15]– [18]. This architectural shift provides two key benefits. First, it reduces the bandwidth gap between intra-node and inter-node communication, allowing communication-intensive par-allelism to scale beyond the physical boundary of one server. Second, it turns the surrounding CPU memory and pooled memory resources into higher-performance memory tiers that can be accessed through the scale-up fabric. As a result, scale-up domains create new opportunities for training systems that must coordinate computation, parameter movement, gradient movement, and optimizer-state placement across heteroge-neous memory resources. 

CloudMatrix384. A representative production-scale real-ization of this scale-up design philosophy is Huawei Cloud-Matrix384 [18], [25]. It integrates 384 Ascend 910 NPUs and 192 Kunpeng CPUs into a unified supernode connected by an ultra-high-bandwidth, low-latency Unified Bus network. Unlike conventional hierarchical clusters, where accelerators are tightly bound to local host CPUs and remote resources are reached through a slower scale-out network, CloudMatrix384 provides a fully peer-to-peer hardware architecture in which NPUs, CPUs, and memory resources can be dynamically pooled and uniformly accessed through the UB fabric. This design is originally motivated by the communication and mem-ory demands of large-scale LLM serving, especially large-scale expert parallelism and distributed KV cache access, but the same hardware substrate is also attractive for memory-efficient training. In particular, CloudMatrix384 exposes a richer set of direct-access paths between accelerators and host-side memory resources. These paths can reduce the cost of moving training states between accelerator memory and CPU memory, and more importantly, they allow the system software to treat host-resident data as an active part of the execution substrate rather than a passive offload target. III. M OTIVATION 

In this section, we first present key observations on GPU offloaded training and Direct-Host-Access (DHA). Then we state our research problem and technical challenges. 

A. Limitations of Offload Training 

We evaluate the performance of GPU offload training in DeepSpeed, a widely-used distributed DL framework [26], and observe three key limitations that motivate our study. 

Low GPU utilization. In ZeRO-Offload, GPU does not perform computation at every moment. Instead, it resides in the idle state for a period of time at each iteration. Take the training of GPT-2 as an example, We find that the idle state occupies around one-third of the GPU runtime, confining the average GPU utilization to be merely 63 .1% . In contrast, when the training is carried out in GPU completely, the GPU utilization is always higher than 80% in every iteration. The huge utilization gap comes from the data shipment of ZeRO-Offload, where the GPU utilization is near zero. This indicates that exchanging data between GPU and CPU is quite slow, leading to the waste of expensive GPU resources. 

Insufficient communication overlapping. We delve into the execution schedule of ZeRO-Offload to understand the root cause of GPU under-utilization. ZeRO-Offload leverages the overlapping of communication and computation to reduce the offloading overhead. As shown in Figure 2(a), the back-ward propagation (labeled as ‘BP’) at GPU partially overlaps the gradient synchronization from GPU to CPU (labeled as ‘Gradients’), and the parameter update (labeled as ‘Update’) partially overlaps the parameter synchronization from CPU to GPU (labeled as ‘Params’). However, such overlapping is imperfect with two bubbles observed in each iteration. Owing to the layer-wise execution of FP and BP, the communication of a layer always takes place after the completion of its computation, generating bubbles in the figure. Even worse, during BP, the final computed layer is often the embedding layer in large language models, which have large model sizes and long transmission latency. Fig.3 illustrates the drawback of ZeRO-Offload execution schedule and highlights how good the optimal overlapping can be. ZeRO-Offload is evaluated under three scenarios: “worst” means that there does not exist the overlapping of communica-tion and computation; “standard” means the normal operation; “best” is the direct removal of the communication time from “worst”. Due to the interference between communication and computation, the BP and CPU update times are prolonged in “standard”, yet the communication time is partially hidden in the computation time. But compared to “best” execution, there is still 57.2% unhidden computation time that leads to training efficiency degradation. 

Inflexible GPU offload. The offloading policy of ZeRO-Offload is inelastic, i.e. a fixed proportion of training contents is moved to CPU memory. However, the GPU memory budget 4  

> (a) ZeRO-Offload’s execution schedule
> (b) MemFerry’s execution schedule Fig. 2. Training schedule: ZeRO-Offload vs MemFerry.
> Fig. 3. ZeRO-Offload in an iteration: worst, standard, best.

needs to be utilized as much as possible to improve the training throughput. There are contents such as gradients that do not have to be stored in the GPU memory in its entirety, an offload training system could offload them when the GPU memory budget is small. Therefore, memory offloading needs to be flexible, catering to versatile memory sizes. 

Summary : Despite the reduced memory occupation of ZeRO-Offload, we observe that the GPU utilization is far from the optimality and the memory offloading is not flexible. A more fine-grained memory offloading policy is demanded to improve the training speed and reduce the GPU memory usage in the meantime. 

B. GPU Computation on CPU Memory 

Commodity GPU streaming multiprocessors (SMs) possess two computing approaches with the data stored in CPU mem-ory [27]. In Figure 4(a), we illustrate these two approaches with Nvidia GPU as an example. 1⃝ on-GPU : the data is ferried from CPU memory to GPU memory (i.e. GPU HBM) before it is computed by GPU SMs. The advantage of on-GPU is the high bandwidth between GPU memory and SMs, while the cost of CPU memory to GPU memory transmission is non-trivial. 2⃝ Direct Host Access (DHA) : The CudaHostAlloc 

function is called to allocate the space in CPU memory and register it to the GPU. In this way, GPU SMs can directly access the registered CPU memory without first staging the data in GPU memory. Naturally, the computation via DHA is slower compared with on-GPU. However, the DHA computa-tion streams and the CPU-GPU data transfer streams in GPU SM are independent, so they can be executed in parallel. Existing ML frameworks such as Pytorch [26] do not support DHA-enabled training. Even though ZeRO-Offload partitions the data in both CPU and GPU memories, the FP and BP operations are entirely processed via the on-GPU mode. DeepPlan [19] introduces DHA computation into model 

inference . With DHA, GPU can load several layers of model parameters from CPU memory to GPU memory, and perform FP computation on other layers in CPU memory in parallel. To explore the potential of DHA in modeling training, we profile the efficiency of both on-GPU and DHA approaches using Bert-base as an example. The results below are measured from a machine with an Nvidia A100 and 8 CPU cores interconnected via 100 Gbps PCIe switch. We next show the training performance when we offload part of the training contents (e.g. parameters and gradients) to CPU memory and enforce GPU to operate them via DHA. 

DHA on CPU parameters in FP. We first measure the FP times of on-GPU and DHA execution for the parameters stored in CPU memory in Figure 4(b). Note that both the transmission time and the computation time are included in the FP time of on-GPU, while they are inseparable in that of DHA. For the 

Embedding and LayerNorm layers, DHA exhibits much shorter FP time than on-GPU. This is because the transmission time of these layers is longer than the computation time, and the on-GPU execution is blocked by the transmission. In contrast, the FP times of the Linear and Convolution layers are longer in DHA than in on-GPU. Obviously, for these layers with high computational loads but small in size, they are more suitable to be executed via the on-GPU approach. 

DHA on CPU parameters in BP. If FP uses on-GPU approach (load parameters from CPU memory), then the model parameters are already in GPU HBM during the BP process. Then, GPU is able to directly use the in-HBM parameters to perform BP. If DHA is used to perform FP, the parameters are still in CPU memory which means GPU still needs to use DHA to perform BP. In Figure 4(c), we show the BP time of these two approaches. Overall, DHA is slower than on-GPU. While compared to FP, the performance degradation of DHA BP is not severe (5 − 10%) . This is because deep learning frameworks have activation retention mechanisms. However, completely ignoring the performance degradation of DHA BP can also lead to poor training efficiency. 

DHA on CPU gradients in BP. During the traditional BP process of offload training, gradients will be generated on the GPU HBM and then transmitted to CPU memory. However, we can make use of DHA to generate gradients directly on CPU memory (leveraging DHA write). So we propose BP integrating DHA gradients as an additional BP execution approach. Figure 4(d) shows the measurement of BP time with DHA gradients. Compared to in-HBM BP which directly generates gradients in GPU HBM, BP with DHA gradients executes slower. The reason is that the former’s SM can write gradients to HBM with high bandwidth, but the latter needs to write gradients to CPU memory through the low-bandwidth PCIe switch. However, DHA gradients do not need any GPU HBM buffer to save gradients, which means the GPU memory requirements for BP are significantly reduced. 5        

> (a) GPU access data in CPU memory
> (b) FP time: on-GPU vs DHA parame-ters
> (c) BP time: in-HBM vs DHA parame-ters (d) BP time: in-HBM vs DHA gradients Fig. 4. DHA and on-GPU execution.
> Fig. 5. An example of hybrid execution.

C. An Ideal Execution Schedule 

The above observations manifest that DHA enriches the FP and BP execution approaches so as to possibly reduce the data ferry time between the CPU memory and the GPU memory. Here, we elaborate on an “ideal” scheduling policy for offloaded training (in Figure 2(b)) and show how to utilize the advantages of the hybrid on-GPU and DHA. To minimize GPU idleness, the execution schedule could leverage hybrid DHA and on-GPU computation. Recall in Figure 2(a), two bubbles exist in each iteration of ZeRO-Offload. The FP bubble is caused by the layer-by-layer param-eter transmission from CPU memory to GPU memory. Hence, we can simultaneously load the parameters of some layers to GPU memory and perform FP computation on other layers in CPU memory via DHA. Figure 5 compares the execution modes of a two-layer model. When the two layers are both performed via on-GPU (labeled as ”All on-GPU”), there is a long computation halt of waiting for parameters transmission. But when layer-1 FP is conducted via DHA and layer-2 is on-GPU, the transmission of parameters is completely hidden and computation starts with no startup latency. In Figure 2(b), one can see that “Partial params” transmission executes in parallel with “Hybrid FP&BP”. The BP bubble (in Figure 2(a)) appears in the gradient transmission between BP and update. The gradient is always generated after BP even if we use a fine-grained schedule. Hence, unlike hybrid execution in FP, we cannot transmit the gradient of a layer before it is generated. However, if gradient transmission could be carefully partitioned, the gradient trans-mission could perform with parameters update in parallel. This is reflected in Figure 2(b) that the “gradients” transmission is partly execution parallel with “BP” and “update”. Achieving such an ideal runtime scheduler with flexible GPU memory offloading has three major challenges.  

> •

Complex training decisions in hybrid training. Differ-ent layers of DL models have different affinities for the execution approaches. We need to design a fine-grained execution schedule leveraging the advantages of hybrid execution training to minimize training time.  

> •

Unified management of GPU and CPU memory. Exist-ing frameworks lack efficient storage support to manage normal and DHA training contents on GPU memory and CPU memory during training. If we blindly copy data even under an optimal schedule, the additional overhead may offset the performance gain.  

> •

Flexible GPU memory offloading. The current offload-ing training designates fixed contents to be offloaded to CPU memory, which is not flexible and makes peak GPU memory usage unchangeable. Further offloading data to CPU memory with a gentle sacrifice of training speed remains a challenge. IV. S YSTEM DESIGN 

In this section, we present an overview of MemFerry with four key aspects, including hybrid training modes, efficient memory management, flexible offloading, and scale-up-aware data movement. 

A. System Overview 

We briefly describe our technical measures toward the key challenges raised in Section III, followed by the workflow. 

1) Scheduler for hybrid training. (Section IV-B) We design a new offloading execution scheduling with hybrid training that overlaps parameter loading time and gradient transmission time with DHA computation. Our schedule proposes three ex-ecution modes, GFGB, DHA and DFGB that are automatically chosen for different layers. 

2) Runtime shared memory management. (Section IV-C) We propose “shadow model”, a logical model on GPU where its underlying storage space spans both GPU memory and CPU DHA memory. The shadow model allows all the tensors to seamlessly switch the underlying storage address between DHA memory and GPU memory, avoiding unnecessary data copy at runtime. 

3) On-demand offloading of GPU memory. (Section IV-D) With DHA, not only the parameters but also the gradients can be offloaded to CPU memory. The gradient offloading could further reduce GPU memory usage at the cost of the gentle increase in per-iteration training time. This means that an elastic choice in pursuit of fast training speed or low GPU memory usage is allowed. 

4)Scale-up-aware data transfer. (Section IV-E) We extend MemFerry to emerging scale-up domains by using accelerator interconnects as assisted paths for CPU-to-accelerator data movement. An adaptive data dispatcher partitions each transfer according to the latency and bandwidth characteristics of the available paths. 6 

> Fig. 6. Overview of MemFerry System.

Fig.6 shows the overall architecture of MemFerry, including the static planning components ( Profiler and Planner ), run-time memory management and execution logic components (Training Engine , DL Optimizer , Recorder ). When a new model training configuration initiates, MemFerry first passes the training configuration into planning modules:  

> •

Profiler. The Profiler uses different training configura-tions to evaluate the intra/inter-layer(s) computation times and the data transmission times.  

> •

Planner. The Planner calls the scheduling algorithm based on the profiled information to determine the spe-cific execution mode for each layer. Once the planning procedure finishes, MemFerry Runtime modules start the model training.  

> •

Training Engine. The Training Engine is responsible for memory management and data transmission. At the beginning of training, it distributes parameters to the cor-responding devices and constructs logical and underlying storage models (including shadow model ). During the training process, it enforces the execution to behave as planned.  

> •

DL Optimizer. The DL Optimizer performs parallel partial gradient transmission support (DMA parameters) and parameter update by user-specific training optimizer.  

> •

Recorder. The Recorder is a runtime monitor that helps to check the actually consumed time of each training process. In the rest of this section, we introduce the technical details of MemFerry and its major features. 

Workflow When a new model training configuration initiates, MemFerry first passes the training configuration into Profiler .The Profiler uses different training configurations to evaluate the intra/inter-layer(s) computation times and the data trans-mission times. Then the Planner calls the scheduling algorithm (See in Section IV-B) based on the profiled information to determine the specific execution mode for each layer. Once the planning procedure finishes, MemFerry Runtime modules start the model training. The Training Engine is responsible for memory management and data transmission. At the beginning of training, it distributes parameters to the corresponding devices and constructs logical and underlying storage models (including shadow model ). During the training process, it schedules the execution to behave as planned. The 

DL Optimizer performs parallel partial gradient transmission  

> Fig. 7. Hybrid training schedule of MemFerry.

support (DHA parameters) and parameter update by user-specific training optimizer. 

B. Hybrid Training Schedule 

We hereby propose the layer-level scheduling algorithm of MemFerry’s scheduler for general foundation models. The design goal is to overlap parameter transmission with DHA computation as much as possible in FP and mitigate the adverse impact of enabling DHA in BP. We create three execution modes for the parameter of each layer: GFGB (GPU Forward GPU Backward), DHA , and DFGB (GPU DHA Forward GPU Backward). Let us take a layer of parameters as a unit. In GFGB, the parameters are transmitted from CPU memory to GPU memory before computation; in DHA, the parameters in CPU memory are computed by GPU SMs di-rectly and no further transmission happens; in DFGB, the layer is transmitted to GPU memory after its DHA FP execution. DFGB helps to reduce BP time because the on-GPU BP is faster than the DHA BP (see in Section III-B) so it can be regarded as a remedy of DHA for BP. Fig.7 illustrates a training schedule example for a three-layer model. We stipulate the execution modes of 1-3 layers to be DHA, DFGB and GFGB respectively. Due to DHA computation without any transmission, layer 1 and 2 start FP computation at the iteration beginning. At the same time, the parameter transmission of layer 3 also starts. When transmis-sion of layer 3 is completed, MemFerry load parameter of layer 2 from CPU to GPU for on-GPU BP, which avoids prolonging the BP time of layer 2. As we hide the gradient transmission with both BP and update, update does not wait for all the gradients to be transmitted. To realize the above schedule, our first step is to profile the training information for MemFerry’s decision-making. During the profiling process, we evaluate the parameter transfer time, FP and BP computation time for each fine-grained layer. The profiling is executed only once, thus bringing negligi-ble overhead. We summarize the profiled variable and their notations below. Here, L: the number of layers; l: the layer id of model; Al,li +1 : computation between layer l and l+1 ;

Ttrans (l): parameter transfer time of layer l; TF P (l): on GPU forward time of layer l; TBP (l): on GPU backward time of layer l; T HF P (l): DHA forward time of layer l; T HBP (l): DHA backward time of layer l; TF P (Al,l +1 ): forward computation time Al,l +1 ; TBP (Al,l +1 ): backward computation time of 

Al,l +1 ; Sl: size of layer l.With the profiled information, we introduce our scheduling algorithm. We logically separate the entire training algorithm into the forward and backward algorithms. 

Forward Algorithm (Alg. 1). Our goal is to minimize the overall execution time and hide transmission time as much 7

Algorithm 1: MemFerry FP Algorithm 

Input: Ttrans , T F P , T HF P , T F P (A)

Output: P 

> 1

Tall , T res , tag ←− 0, 0, −1; 

> 2

for l ←− 1 to L do  

> 3

if T HF P (l) ≤ TF P (l) + max ( Ttrans (l), 0) then  

> 4

Pl ←− DHA ; 

> 5

update (T HF P (l), T HF P (l)) ; 

> 6

else  

> 7

if Ttrans (l) < T res then  

> 8

if tag = −1 then tag ←− l; 

> 9

update (TF P (l), T F P (l) − Ttrans ); 

> 10

else  

> 11

backtrack (l, tag, T all , T res ); 

> 12

end  

> 13

Pl ←− GF GB ; 

> 14

end  

> 15

update (TF P (Al,l +1 ), T F P (Al,l +1 )) ; 

> 16

end  

> 17

return P, T res , tag ; 

> 18

Function backtrack( l,bt ,T ball ,T bres ): 

> 19

base ←− T ball + Ttrans (l) + TF P (l) − T bres ; 

> 20

for i ←− bt to l do  

> 21

gain ←− Ttrans (i) + T HF P (i) − TF P (i); 

> 22

T iall ←− max( Ttrans (l) − T bres − gain, 0) + T ball +(T HF P (i) − TF P (i)) + TF P (l) ; 

> 23

if T iall < baseline then  

> 24

Pi, tag ←− DHA, i + 1 ; 

> 25

base, T bres ←− T iall , T bres + gain ; 

> 26

if T bres ≥ Ttrans (l) then break ; 

> 27

end  

> 28

end  

> 29

update (base, max( T bres − Ttrans (l), 0) + TF P (l)) ; 

> 30

Function update( to,tr ): 

> 31

Tall , T res ←− Tall + to, T res + tr ;

Fig. 8. Backtrack to turn execution mode of layer i to DHA. 

as possible in computation. The execution plan is denoted as P and the overall execution time as Tall . We notice that computation can provide some overlapping time for commu-nication. This overlapping time is called the reserved overlap time and denoted as Tres . From the previous observations, we learn that loading time is often larger than computation time. Based on this, we make a simple criterion for judging each layer’s execution mode. When the DHA computation time is less than on-GPU computation with loading time, using DHA can reserve more overlapping time for other layers to load parameters (i.e. Tres increases) and reduce execution time. On the contrary, using GFGB mode is intuitively better. As the above intuitive methods do not guarantee the op-timality, we design a backtracking function. A layer that is decided to execute using GFGB mode may have two cases. When the reserve time Tres is greater than its loading time 

Ttrans , it has sufficient time to load its parameters and then compute. When Tres is insufficient to cover its loading time, we backtrack the previous GFGB layers and modify their execution mode to DHA mode, which provides more overlap time for the layer to load parameters. Figure 8 shows the effect on Tres and Tall when we modify a GFGB mode layer i to DHA mode. After execution mode changing, Tres , Tall will increase and we labeled them T ires ,

T iall . As in the figure, the gain of Tres could be computed as 

T ires − Tres = Tall + T HF P (i) − T HF P (i) + Ttrans (i). In the backtracking process for a new GFGB layer l, after changing the execution mode of a previous layer i, if the Ttrans (i) −

T ires − Tres is larger than T iall − Tall , then the mode change of layer i successfully hides more parameter load time of layer 

l without prolonging overall execution time. 

Backward Algorithm. The PCIe communication is idle for a certain period between the end of parameter loading from CPU memory and the beginning of gradient transmission back to CPU memory. To fully utilize this idleness to reduce the negative impact of DHA computing, we present the DFGB execution mode that loads several layers of parameters (after FP) still in CPU memory into GPU memory. For these layers, their BP can be performed on GPU so as to reduce the time of obtaining the gradients. We design a greedy algorithm to decide whether the layers are executed in DFGB mode. 

Algorithm 2: MemFerry BP process 

Input: Ttrans , T BP , T HBP , T BP (A), P, T res , tag 

Output: P 

> 1

Tres ←− Tres + PLl=tag +1 (TBP (l) + TBP (Al,l +1 )) ; 

> 2

load dict ←− ∅; 

> 3

for l ←− L to 1 do  

> 4

if Pl = 1 and T trans (l) + TBP (l) < T HBP (l) then  

> 5

load dict.add (T HBP (l) − Ttrans (l) − TBP (l), l ); 

> 6

end  

> 7

end  

> 8

SortbyKeyDesc (Tres ); 

> 9

forall g, l ∈ load dict do  

> 10

if Tres > T trans (l) then  

> 11

Pl, T res ←− DF GB, T res − Ttrans (l) ; 

> 12

end  

> 13

end  

> 14

return P ;

C. Memory Management 

The hybrid training requires MemFerry to be capable of computing data stored in both the GPU memory and the CPU memory. This signifies that MemFerry will stipulate the storage space for different partitions of the model and their respective access patterns. We then design an abstract model named shadow model with a set of merits: shared memory of GPU and CPU , minimal memory copy and compatible to ML frameworks . We next explain where the model partitions are stored and how they interact with the shadow model. We firstly separate the models of the logical level and the underlying storage level. In Training Engine , a logical CPU model (for updates), a logical GPU model (for FP&BP) and CPU-GPU parameters storage are maintained, as the Figure 9 shows. In the CPU memory, the model parameters are partitioned into three parts corresponding to the three execution modes in Section III-C: 1) GFGB parameters that will be transmitted to the GPU memory; 2) DHA parameters that will be computed in situ by GPU; 3) DFGB parameters that will be computed by GPU first and be transmitted to GPU 8 

> Fig. 9. The shadow memory management in MemFerry.

memory later on. To maximize the parallel computing power of the CPU SIMD, we aggregate the GFGB parameters into a long parameter vector. Besides, the CPU memory also hosts the gradient and the optimizer state just like ZeRO-Offload. The GPU runtime memory stores the GFGB parameters buffer and the DFGB parameters buffer in line with the corresponding parameters on CPU memory. The logical GPU model used in FP&BP is called the shadow model . MemFerry adopts a dynamic mapping mechanism for the underlying storage of shadow model based on the execution plan. The parameters of the shadow model are not necessarily located in the GPU memory but may also be mapped from the CPU parameters. For example, the parameters executed by the GFGB mode are projected and transmitted from the long parameter vector to GPU memory; for the parameters executed by DHA mode, MemFerry directly delivers their storage pointers to the shadow model, which could access them directly. As shown in Figure 9, We use three colors to differentiate the execution modes of GFGB ( blue ), DHA ( yellow ) and DFGB ( orange ). The DHA parameters are directly mapped from CPU memory to the shadow model in GPU. The GFGB parameters are coordinated to a large contiguous area in CPU memory, and mapped separately to GPU memory layer by layer when being loaded. The DFGB parameters have both the DHA storage and the GPU memory storage, whose pointer can be switched before BP starts. The shadow model abstraction brings two advantages: 1) 

Reducing space allocation and memory copy. by unified storage of logical parameters. We directly share some of the DHA parameters of the CPU model with the GPU model, avoiding redundancy and copying in the memory buffer. 2) Fa-cilitating dynamic storage switching in DFGB. MemFerry dynamically modifies the mapping of the physical storage of the DFGB layer after FP and change it back after BP without additional burden or affecting the learning procedure. 

D. Gradient Offloading 

A crucial question regarding DHA-enabled training is whether the GPU memory requirement can be further relieved. With the ever-growing model size, MemFerry may still run out of GPU memory. To achieve the flexible usage of GPU memory and avoid violating the memory limit, we present GO-MemFerry based on the aforementioned scheduling algorithms and observations. The GPU content of MemFerry includes the partial model parameters, the gradients generated by BP and intermediate activation. Further offloading model parameters will signif-icantly decrease the training speed of layers that are not suitable for DHA. Offloading intermediate activation values involves a large number of reads and writes between GPU and CPU through slow PCIe. Therefore, GO-MemFerry chooses to offload the gradients. Specifically, GO-MemFerry designates a CPU memory as DHA memory, mapping it to the gradient storage of the shadow model. During the BP process, GO-MemFerry will directly generate the gradient in the CPU mem-ory, avoiding the transferring and copying of GPU memory. However, we do not expect gradient offloading to bring a significant side effect to training speed, and the amount of memory offloaded should be determined based on the needs of users. GO-MemFerry does not completely offload the gradients of the entire model but the gradients of partial parameters while meeting the user’s memory needs. In Section III-B, we find that different model parameters have different performances on gradient offloading. Based on this phe-nomenon, GO-MemFerry automatically determines the layers for gradient offload to ensure maximum training speed under the user-specified memory requirement. 

Gradient offload algorithm. We design a gradient offload algorithm based on dynamic programming. In this algorithm, users need to specify the total percentage Sreq of gradient on GPU (named reserve factor ), and the algorithm outputs the specific layers to offload as the gradient offload plan P GO . We denote the normal on-GPU BP time for each layer as TCBP ,while the BP time after offloading the gradient by DHA is 

TGBP . We default to offload gradients for all layers at the beginning and then judge the gain TGBP −TCBP in time when adjusting a layer’s gradient to on-GPU mode. If we define the problem Al which means the maximum gain offload strategy of layer 1 to l. Then we could find that for a specific layer i, Ai

is up to subproblem Ai−1. if layer i is choose to keep gradient offloading then Ai = Ai−1, else if layer i turn gradient to GPU then Ai = Ai−1 + TGBP (i) − TCBP (i). Based on this optimal substructure, we construct a dynamic programming table Dl,s 

from two dimensions: layer id and space. The second axis of the table represents the size of the space occupied by the current plan, which is used to limit overall space. The content of the table is the execution time gain of the current plan (i.e. 

A). The recursion formula of D is given by: 

Di,j = max( Di−1,j , D i−1,j −Si + TGBP (i) − TCBP (i)) .

By using dynamic programming to identify the gradient of-floading plan that has the least execution time, GO-MemFerry ensures the use of gradient offload meets the memory require-ment with the least side effect. This allows users to adjust their memory requirements based on the actual memory size even after offloading some parameters and optimizer states during the various training processes. When the specified gradient is fully offloaded, the GPU memory required for GO-MemFerry is only the size of partial parameters and activations. 9 

> Fig. 10. Scale-up assisted data transfer.

E. Adapting to modern scale-up domains 

The emerging scale-up architectures provide new opportuni-ties to further accelerate the data movement in MemFerry. The original MemFerry is designed for conventional CPU–GPU interconnections, where parameters and gradients are directly transferred between CPU memory and the target GPU through PCIe. In modern scale-up domains, however, accelerators are interconnected with much higher bandwidth and richer connectivity than CPU–accelerator links. For example, in our target CloudMatrix configuration, each CPU provides five UB links while an NPU exposes seven high-speed UB ports. Therefore, directly transferring data from CPU 0 to NPU 0 may be bounded by the limited CPU–NPU link bandwidth, while substantial bandwidth among NPUs remains unused. This mismatch is particularly undesirable for MemFerry because large amounts of parameters and gradients are repeatedly transferred between CPU and accelerator memories. To exploit the additional bandwidth provided by scale-up fabrics, we extend MemFerry with scale-up-assisted data transfer and an adaptive data dispatcher. 

Scale-up assistent data transfer. Consider transferring a tensor from CPU 0 memory to NPU 0. Besides the conventional direct path CPU 0 → NPU 0, MemFerry introduces an assisted path CPU 0 → NPU 1 → NPU 0, where NPU 1 temporarily serves as a forwarding device. As shown in Figure 10, the two paths transmit different partitions of the tensor concurrently. Since the NPU–NPU bandwidth in a scale-up fabric is con-siderably higher than the CPU–NPU bandwidth, forwarding the data from NPU 1 to NPU 0 introduces relatively small transmission overhead for large tensors. More importantly, the assisted path utilizes another CPU egress link and oth-erwise idle NPU interconnect bandwidth, thereby increasing the effective bandwidth from CPU memory to the target NPU. This design can naturally use multiple assisting NPUs when available. Given a set of assisting NPUs A, the additional transfer capacity is approximately bounded by 

X

> i∈A

min ( BC→i, B i→0) ,

subject to the CPU memory bandwidth and UB fabric con-tention. In this way, MemFerry converts the abundant NPU– NPU connectivity in scale-up domains into additional band-width for offloaded training data movement. 

Adaptive data dispatcher. The assisted path provides higher aggregate bandwidth but introduces an additional forward-ing hop, making it less attractive for small transfers whose performance is dominated by latency. MemFerry therefore dynamically partitions each transfer according to the latency and bandwidth of the two paths. Consider a tensor of size 

S, where x bytes are assigned to the direct path and S − x

bytes to the assisted path. Denoting their startup latencies and effective bandwidths by (Ld, B d) and (La, B a), respectively, the transfer time is 

T (x) = max 



Ld + xBd

, L a + S − xBa



.

MemFerry chooses 

x∗ = arg min  

> 0≤x≤S

T (x).

When both paths are used, their completion times are balanced, yielding 

x∗ =

 Bd (S + Ba(La − Ld)) 

Bd + Ba

S

> 0

,

where [·]S 

> 0

clips the value into [0 , S ]. Consequently, when 

S ≤ Bd(La − Ld),

the entire tensor is transferred through the low-latency direct path. As S increases, more data is assigned to the assisted path, and its fraction asymptotically approaches 

Ba

Bd + Ba

.

MemFerry profiles (Ld, B d, L a, B a) for the underlying topol-ogy and applies the resulting allocation to parameter and gradient transfers, preserving low latency for small tensors while exploiting the higher aggregate bandwidth of scale-up fabrics for large transfers. V. I MPLEMENTATION 

We elaborate on the implementation of MemFerry as below. 

MemFerry Memory Management. (1) Memory sharing. 

MemFerry needs a programming interface to share the DMA memory between the CPU model and the GPU shadow model. The CPU memory pointers can be shared through this interface and used by the GPU SMs. We implement a memory alloca-tor class, THCCachingCUDAHostSharedAllocator , in PyTorch that returns the CPU memory address of the corresponding DMA tensor allocated in the GPU. Through this memory allocator, both the GPU shadow model and the CPU model can access the same physical address in CPU memory and share the tensor located in this area. (2) DFGB memory switching. The DFGB mechanism re-quires the switching of parameters between DMA tensors and GPU HBM tensors at runtime. Because the automatic differ-entiation of PyTorch records related computation operations or gradient functions of the parameter tensors, directly replacing parameter tensors in the logic layer may lead to malfunction in BP. To address this problem, MemFerry replaces the storage 

field of the tensor. Both the DHA tensor and CUDA tensor consist of storage (storage class includes memory pointers and access formats) and other description fields. So the pa-rameter switching could be achieved by switching the storage 10        

> (a) Bert-base (b) Roberta (c) Bert-large (d) GPT-2 Fig. 11. Overall iteration time.
> (a) Average GPU utilization (b) Reserve factors Fig. 12. Utilization and reserve factor of GO-MemFerry.
> Fig. 13. Training performance on Nvidia V100 GPU.

reference (an 8-bit field) of parameter tensors. In this way, we complete the implementation of DFGB parameter switching without any data copying or computation graph modification. 

MemFerry Tensor Scheduling. MemFerry utilizes the asynchronous execution mechanism in PyTorch to schedule tensors. At the beginning of data transfer, we apply the non-blocking option to the transmission function (such as copy ), so the CPU does not have to forcibly wait for the GPU to complete the transmission. After transmission on the GPU starts, CPU can start the corresponding computation, thereby achieving parallel execution of computation and transmission. When execution to the scheduling boundary in Sec.IV-B, we added a mandatory synchronization barrier to ensure the consistency of transmitting data. 

ScaleUp-MemFerry Implementation. We extend the Training Engine with a direct path and an assisted path for CPU-to-NPU data movement. During profiling, MemFerry measures the startup latency and effective bandwidth of both paths for the underlying UB topology. The adaptive dis-patcher computes the data partition according to Sec.IV-E and   

> (a) Bert-base (b) GPT2 Fig. 14. Memory usage of GO-MemFerry during training

launches the two transfers concurrently. A synchronization is inserted before the transferred tensor is consumed by the target NPU. VI. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

Testbed and DNN Models. Our evaluation is conducted on two cloud instances, one equipped with 128 CPU cores and 8 Nvidia A100 GPUs of 80 GB memory, the other equipped with 

12 CPU cores and an Nvidia V100 GPU of 32 GB memory. Both of them are equipped with PCIe 3.0. The software we use includes Pytorch-1.9.0, Python-3.6 and CUDA-11.7. The foun-dation models in our experiments include Bert-base/Bert-large [2], Roberta [28], GPT-2-medium [3] models of transformers [29] library and transformerXL [30]. In transformerXL, we manually configure a set of models of different sizes within the range 0.7B-6.7B in order to evaluate system performance in a controlled manner. The embedding layer size ranges from 

32768 to 130528 , the hidden layer size is from 2048 to 4096 

and the sequence length is from 378 to 4096 . The scale-up evaluation is conducted separately on a CloudMatrix384 compute node and is described in Sec.VI-E. 

Baselines and Metrics. Our baseline systems include DeepSpeed implementation of ZeRO-Offload (DeepSpeed), native ZeRO-Offload (Native-Offload), MemFerry and GO-MemFerry. The implementation methods influence the perfor-mance of ZeRO-Offload and MemFerry. In MemFerry, we do not destroy the gradients on GPU after they have been used while DeepSpeed does so. This brings considerable latency for DeepSpeed to dynamically construct and deconstruct the gradient buffer. For fair comparison, we implement a native ZeRO-Offload that is faithful to its original design. Note that for GO-MemFerry, the default configuration is to completely offload the gradients via DHA. The performance metrics considered in our evaluation are threefold: per-iteration time ,

GPU utilization , and GPU memory usage . For the scale-up evaluation in Sec.VI-E, we additionally report CPU-to-NPU transfer bandwidth. 

B. Training Efficiency of MemFerry 

Speedup over various DNNs. We first evaluate the training speed of MemFerry with different large language models in Figure 11. Overall, the per-iteration time is consistently the highest in DeepSpeed, while it is always the shortest in MemFerry. In all the models training we conducted, MemFerry has a 10% to 40% improvement in training speed compared to DeepSpeed and Native-Offload. When using the two smaller 11     

> (a) Bert-base (110M) (b) Roberta (110M) (c) Bert-large (340M) (d) GPT-2 (355M) Fig. 15. Maximum memory usage.

models ( Bert-base , Roberta ), the training speed of MemFerry improves by 21 .7% to 68 .7% compared to the baselines. As for larger models ( Bert-large , GPT-2 ), the training speedup is reduced to 7.1% till 32 .1% . The main reason is that they usually require large inputs such that the computation time accounts for a larger proportion of the overall training period. 

GPU utilization improvement. The GPU utilization when training GPT-2 is illustrated in Figure 12(a). MemFerry’s GPU utilization is 18 .5% higher than DeepSpeed and 1.5% higher than Native-Offload. This utilization improvement originates from MemFerry reducing the GPU idle time during commu-nication and improving the utilization of GPU SMs through parallel DHA computation and transmission. Native-Offload has higher utilization than DeepSpeed because the latter needs time to allocate and reclaim gradient memory. GO-MemFerry has the highest utilization ( 27% higher than DeepSpeed), as it parallel executes gradient computation and transmission. 

C. Training Memory Usage 

Larger model size limitation. To demonstrate the training performance of MemFerry and GO-MemFerry under limited training resources, we conduct LLM training on the V100 GPU machine. In Figure 13, we configure models of different sizes with a training batch size of 1 MemFerry is still the fastest in all training configurations, 1.12 × faster than the baseline. When GO-MemFerry fully offload gradients in this figure, the training speed is the slowest, but only 3.4% lower than the baseline. This is because the lower PCIe bandwidth severely affects the write operations of DHA gradients. As the model size increases, Native-Offload, DeepSpeed, and MemFerry all experience memory overflow. After the model is larger than 2.4B, only GO-MemFerry can train normally. Overall, GO-MemFerry can support models that are 1.52 ×

larger than DeepSpeed ZeRO-Offload with limited memory. 

Memory usage reduction over various DNNs. We then study the peak GPU memory usage in an entire training iteration. In Figure 15, MemFerry reduces GPU memory by average 40 .1% compared with DeepSpeed when training smaller language models. Compared to baselines, MemFerry uses DHA computing to move some parameters from the GPU to the CPU. GO-MemFerry has a memory reduction of 17 .6% even compared to MemFerry, as the gradients are completely removed from the GPU memory. When training 

GPT-2 , MemFerry saves the GPU memory by an average of 

1.4% . On average, MemFerry and GO-MemFerry reduce GPU memory by 25 .4% and 41 .6% .        

> (a) Iteration time (b) Memory usage Fig. 16. Training on large language models.
> (a) Scalability to number of GPUs (batch size = 16)
> (b) Scalability to batch size (8 GPUs) Fig. 17. Performance in multi-GPU training.

Flexibility of GO-MemFerry. As shown in Fig.14, we first measure the GPU memory usage with different reserve factors. In the training of both Bert-base and GPT2, the memory usage of GO-MemFerry is proportional to the reserve factor, which means that ML engineers can flexibly determine the gradient offloading scheme using GO-MemFerry, given their GPU memory budgets. When offloading the gradients completely, GO-MemFerry saves an average of 20 .9% GPU memory compared to MemFerry. While offloading gradients within the user-specified memory size based on the reserve factor, GO-MemFerry minimizes the degradation in the training speed. In Figure 12(b), we measure the iteration time of GO-MemFerry when the gradient reserve factor (larger means keep more gradients on GPU) varies. As the reserve factor increases, iteration time gradually decreases due to less DHA gradient write. The curves are convex, indicating that GO-MemFerry’s gradient offload algorithm offloads the gradients with the smallest performance loss to meet users’ needs. When the reserve factor increases, GO-MemFerry leans to MemFerry, resulting in a higher training speed. 

D. Scalability of MemFerry 

Scalability to model size. Figure 16(a) shows the training speeds of TransformerXL with different parameter sizes where the batch size is set to 8. MemFerry always possesses the high-est training speed, 1.32 × faster than DeepSpeed on average. As the model size increases, the speed advantage of MemFerry decreases. When training the 1B model, MemFerry has a train-ing speed improvement of 1.37 × compared to DeepSpeed, 12      

> (a) CPU-to-NPU transfer band-width.
> (b) End-to-end training performance. Fig. 18. Performance of ScaleUp-MemFerry on the CloudMatrix384 scale-up architecture.

while training the 6.7B model the improvement is 1.26 ×. This is because when the model is larger, the computation time during the training process also significantly increases. Figure 16(b) shows the memory usage. Overall, GO-MemFerry uses the least space, with an average reduction of 21 .6% compared to DeepSpeed. As the model size increases, the maximum memory savings of GO-MemFerry remain between 18% and 

22% . indicating that GO-MemFerry can reduce the memory requirements for large-scale model training. 

Scalability to multiple GPUs. MemFerry supports data parallel training that “aggregates” the computing power of multiple GPUs (using Pytorch DataParallel). As shown in Figure 17(a), the iteration time decreases with the number of GPU increases when we train a 4.3B model with a fixed global batch size. Specifically, MemFerry takes 5.41s to complete an iteration on average using a GPU and 4.12s using 8 GPUs. As the training scale increases, inter-GPU communication becomes the new bottleneck that limits the performance of MemFerry. However, MemFerry still ensures a better perfor-mance when training with multi-GPUs. For example, when scaling to training with 8 GPUs, MemFerry increases the training speed by 28.1% compared to DeepSpeed and 19.1% compared to Native-Offload. 

Scalability to batch size. As training can be conducted with different batch sizes for best performance, we study MemFerry by assigning larger batch sizes to a 6.7B model training in 8 GPUs. As shown in Figure 17(b), we observe that MemFerry always outperforms all the baselines when the batch size increases. Specifically, when the batch size is 128, MemFerry and GO-MemFerry trains faster than DeepSpeed by 

1.21 × and 1.16 × respectively. This observation means that if resources are limited to training models and offloading is used, MemFerry could always improve the training efficiency. 

E. Scaling to scale-up domain. 

We evaluate ScaleUp-MemFerry on one compute node of Huawei CloudMatrix384, using four NPUs for model training and the other four NPUs as assisting devices for scale-up-assisted data transfer. All NPUs and CPUs are interconnected through the high-bandwidth Unified Bus (UB). We conduct two sets of experiments. First, we use a microbenchmark with one target NPU and one assisting NPU to study the CPU-to-NPU transfer performance under different transfer sizes. This experiment evaluates both the benefit of the additional assisted path and the effectiveness of our adaptive data dis-patcher. Second, we evaluate the end-to-end training perfor-mance using a 13B Transformer-XL model on four NPUs. We compare DeepSpeed, Native-Offload, the original MemFerry, and ScaleUp-MemFerry, where ScaleUp-MemFerry augments MemFerry with the scale-up-assisted data transfer and adaptive data dispatcher described in Sec. IV-E. 

Effectiveness of adaptive data transfer. Figure 18(a) shows the achieved CPU-to-NPU bandwidth under different transfer sizes. Direct transfers all data through the origi-nal CPU →NPU target path, while Assisted transfers all data through the additional CPU →NPU assist →NPU target path. 

Adaptive uses the two paths concurrently and partitions the data between them according to our adaptive data dispatcher. For small transfers, the bandwidth difference among the three schemes is limited because the transfer time is largely domi-nated by communication latency. As the transfer size increases, Adaptive can effectively exploit the additional bandwidth provided by the assisted path and considerably outperform either path used alone. For example, with a 16 MB transfer, Direct and Assisted achieve approximately 53 GB/s and 43 GB/s, respectively, whereas Adaptive reaches approximately 86 GB/s, corresponding to 1.62 × and 2.0× their bandwidths. Adaptive continues to sustain more than 80 GB/s for transfer sizes from 16 MB to 256 MB. These results demonstrate that neither path alone can fully utilize the available scale-up bandwidth, while our adaptive data dispatcher effectively divides data across the two paths according to their distinct latency and bandwidth characteristics. 

End-to-end training performance. We further investigate whether the higher CPU-to-NPU transfer bandwidth translates into end-to-end training speedup. Figure 18(b) reports the per-iteration time for training the 13B Transformer-XL model with batch sizes ranging from 32 to 256. ScaleUp-MemFerry consistently achieves the shortest iteration time across all evaluated batch sizes. Compared with the original MemFerry, ScaleUp-MemFerry further reduces the iteration time by up to approximately 4.0%, showing that scale-up-assisted data transfer provides additional performance gains even after MemFerry has overlapped a large fraction of data movement with GPU computation. Compared with DeepSpeed, ScaleUp-MemFerry reduces the iteration time by up to approximately 20.7%. Moreover, its performance advantage is consistently maintained as the batch size increases, indicating that the additional transfer path can be effectively incorporated into the original MemFerry execution schedule. Overall, these results demonstrate that ScaleUp-MemFerry can exploit the richer communication resources in emerging scale-up domains to further accelerate offload training. VII. R ELATED WORK 

Offload Training (or heterogeneous training). To train large-scale models with limited GPU memory [8]–[10], [31]– [35], previous works offloaded the model training content to devices with larger memory (such as CPU and NVMe [13], [14], [36]). L2L [12] offloaded parameters into CPU retrieving them as needed for computational processes during training. MemFerry continues the approach of CPU offload while introducing GPU DHA, into training, providing a new execution schedule and gradient offloading method. 13 

DL Systems with Direct-Access. In model inference, Deep-Plan [19] leveraged DHA to serve better inference, which achieves layer-wise communication overlap with computa-tion. In deep learning training, systems [37], [38] leveraged DMA [27], a GPU feature for unified cross-device data man-agement, to reduce data copying and achieve computation-communication overlap for specific models (e.g. CNNs, GNNs). MemFerry provides a training paradigm for general offload training by leveraging DHA not only to overlap trans-mission but also to reduce the training memory requirement. 

System optimizations in scale-up networks. Recent stud-ies exploit the high-bandwidth accelerator interconnects in scale-up networks to improve deep learning systems [39]– [41]. For example, Aqua [40] uses peer GPU memory within a scale-up domain to balance inference memory usage, while InfiniteHBD [41] coordinates scale-up and scale-out commu-nication for distributed training. Different from these works, ScaleUp-MemFerry targets CPU-offloaded training and ex-ploits otherwise underutilized accelerator interconnect band-width to assist CPU-to-accelerator data movement with adap-tive multi-path transmission. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we propose MemFerry, which leverages hybrid GPU execution approaches to accelerate offload training and reduce memory usage. Our key contribution is to prove that GPU’s DHA feature can potentially benefit deep learning train-ing. We integrate the GPU DHA feature into offload training and design hybrid training patterns that can fully overlap the transmission of offload training. We propose a unified man-agement abstraction called the shadow model which removes redundant memory copying. We further propose a gradient of-fload strategy - GO-MemFerry which reduces training memory requirement on demand. Evaluations show that MemFerry can speed up offload training meanwhile significantly reducing the memory requirement for training. REFERENCES [1] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” CoRR , vol. abs/2303.08774, 2023. [2] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. NIPS’17. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, p. 6000–6010. [3] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533 [4] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi` ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez, A. Joulin, E. Grave, and G. Lample, “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” CoRR , vol. abs/2302.13971, 2023. [5] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” in NeurIPS ,2020. [6] S. Rajbhandari, J. Rasley, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Zero: memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2020, Virtual Event / Atlanta, Georgia, USA, November 9-19, 2020 . IEEE/ACM, 2020, p. 20. [7] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, D. Chen, M. X. Chen, H. Lee, J. Ngiam, Q. V. Le, Y. Wu, and Z. Chen, “Gpipe: Efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada , 2019, pp. 103–112. [8] C. Huang, G. Jin, and J. Li, “Swapadvisor: Pushing deep learning beyond the GPU memory limit via smart swapping,” in ASPLOS ’20: Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Lausanne, Switzerland, March 16-20, 2020 . ACM, 2020, pp. 1341–1355. [9] J. Ren, J. Luo, K. W., M. Zhang, H. Jeon, and D. Li, “Sentinel: Efficient tensor migration and allocation on heterogeneous memory systems for deep learning,” in IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA 2021, Seoul, South Korea, February 27 - March 3, 2021 . IEEE, 2021, pp. 598–611. [10] L. Wang, J. Ye, Y. Zhao, W. Wu, A. Li, S. L. Song, Z. Xu, and T. Kraska, “Superneurons: dynamic GPU memory management for training deep neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP 2018, Vienna, Austria, February 24-28, 2018 . ACM, 2018, pp. 41–53. [11] J. Ren, S. Rajbhandari, R. Y. Aminabadi, O. Ruwase, S. Yang, M. Zhang, D. Li, and Y. He, “Zero-offload: Democratizing billion-scale model training,” in 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC 2021, July 14-16, 2021 . USENIX Association, 2021, pp. 551–564. [12] B. Pudipeddi, M. Mesmakhosroshahi, J. Xi, and S. Bharadwaj, “Training large neural networks with constant memory using a new execution algorithm,” CoRR , vol. abs/2002.05645, 2020. [13] S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, J. Rasley, S. Smith, and Y. He, “Zero-infinity: breaking the GPU memory wall for extreme scale deep learn-ing,” in International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2021, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, November 14-19, 2021 . ACM, 2021, p. 59. [14] X. Sun, W. Wang, S. Qiu, R. Yang, S. Huang, J. Xu, and Z. Wang, “STRONGHOLD: fast and affordable billion-scale deep learning model training,” in SC22: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, Dallas, TX, USA, Novem-ber 13-18, 2022 . IEEE, 2022, pp. 71:1–71:17. [15] N. Corporation, “NVIDIA GB200 NVL72,” 2025, https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/gb200-nvl72/. [16] AWS, “AWS Trainium,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon. com/ai/machine-learning/trainium/ [17] N. P. Jouppi and S. Lakshmanamurthy, “Ironwood: Delivering best in class perf, perf/tco and perf/watt for reasoning model training and serving,” in IEEE Hot Chips 37 Symposium, HCS 2025, Stanford, CA, USA, August 24-26, 2025 . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–26. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/HCS66204.2025.11154400 [18] P. Zuo, H. Lin, J. Deng, N. Zou, X. Yang, Y. Diao, W. Gao, K. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Lu, Z. Qiu, P. Li, X. Chang, Z. Yu, F. Miao, J. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. Feng, B. Wang, Z. Zong, M. Zhou, W. Zhou, H. Chen, X. Liao, Y. Li, W. Zhang, P. Zhu, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, D. Liang, D. Cao, J. Liu, Y. Yang, X. Bai, Y. Li, H. Xie, H. Wu, Z. Yu, L. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Ding, H. Zhu, J. Xia, Y. Xiong, Z. Yu, and H. Liao, “Serving large language models on huawei cloudmatrix384,” CoRR , vol. abs/2506.12708, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.12708 [19] J. Jeong, S. Baek, and J. Ahn, “Fast and efficient model serving using multi-gpus with direct-host-access,” in Proceedings of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys 2023, Rome, Italy, May 8-12, 2023 . ACM, 2023, pp. 249–265. [20] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-tion,” in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings , 2015. [21] T. Chen, B. Xu, C. Zhang, and C. Guestrin, “Training deep nets with sublinear memory cost,” CoRR , vol. abs/1604.06174, 2016. [22] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters,” in KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23-27, 2020 . ACM, 2020, pp. 3505–3506. [23] K. Qian, Y. Xi, J. Cao, J. Gao, Y. Xu, Y. Guan, B. Fu, X. Shi, F. Zhu, R. Miao, C. Wang, P. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Zeng, E. Ruan, Z. Yao, E. Zhai, and D. Cai, “Alibaba HPN: A data center network for large language model training,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference, ACM SIGCOMM 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia, August 4-8, 2024 . ACM, 2024, pp. 691–706. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672265 14 

[24] Z. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. Zhong, Q. Huang, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Peng, X. Li, C. Xie, S. Nong, Y. Jia, S. He, H. Chen, Z. Bai, Q. Hou, S. Yan, D. Zhou, Y. Sheng, Z. Jiang, H. Xu, H. Wei, Z. Zhang, P. Nie, L. Zou, S. Zhao, L. Xiang, Z. Liu, Z. Li, X. Jia, J. Ye, X. Jin, and X. Liu, “Megascale: Scaling large language model training to more than 10, 000 gpus,” in 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2024, Santa Clara, CA, April 15-17, 2024 , L. Vanbever and I. Zhang, Eds. USENIX Association, 2024, pp. 745–760. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi24/presentation/jiang-ziheng [25] H. xDeepServe (XDS) Team, “Huawei cloud model-as-a-service on the cloudmatrix384 superpod,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2508.02520 [26] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. K¨ opf, E. Z. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada , 2019, pp. 8024–8035. [27] N. Corporation, “Cuda c++ programming guide,” 2024. [28] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach,” CoRR , vol. abs/1907.11692, 2019. [29] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, J. Davison, S. Shleifer, P. von Platen, C. Ma, Y. Jernite, J. Plu, C. Xu, T. L. Scao, S. Gugger, M. Drame, Q. Lhoest, and A. M. Rush, “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, EMNLP 2020 - Demos, Online, November 16-20, 2020 .Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 38–45. [30] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. G. Carbonell, Q. V. Le, and R. Salakhutdi-nov, “Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context,” in Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 2978–2988. [31] L. Wang, J. Ye, Y. Zhao, W. Wu, A. Li, S. L. S., Z. Xu, and T. Kraska, “Superneurons: dynamic GPU memory management for training deep neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP 2018, Vienna, Austria, February 24-28, 2018 . ACM, 2018, pp. 41–53. [32] X. Peng, X. Shi, H. Dai, H. Jin, W. Ma, Q. Xiong, F. Yang, and X. Qian, “Capuchin: Tensor-based GPU memory management for deep learning,” in ASPLOS ’20: Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Lausanne, Switzerland, March 16-20, 2020 . ACM, 2020, pp. 891–905. [33] J. Ren, J. Luo, K. Wu, M. Zhang, H. Jeon, and D. Li, “Sentinel: Efficient tensor migration and allocation on heterogeneous memory systems for deep learning,” in IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA 2021, Seoul, South Korea, February 27 - March 3, 2021 . IEEE, 2021, pp. 598–611. [34] C. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Guo, B. He, X. Zhang, and X. Du, “imlbench: A machine learning benchmark suite for CPU-GPU integrated archi-tectures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst. , vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1740–1752, 2021. [35] Z. Li, Q. Cao, Y. Chen, and W. Yan, “Cotrain: Efficient scheduling for large-model training upon GPU and CPU in parallel,” in Proceedings of the 52nd International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP 2023, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, August 7-10, 2023 . ACM, 2023, pp. 92–101. [36] J. Bae, J. Lee, Y. Jin, S. Son, S. Kim, H. Jang, T. J. Ham, and J. W. Lee, “Flashneuron: Ssd-enabled large-batch training of very deep neural networks,” in 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, FAST 2021, February 23-25, 2021 , M. K. Aguilera and G. Yadgar, Eds. USENIX Association, 2021, pp. 387–401. [37] Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Liao, C. Chen, Y. Yang, B. Dong, W. Chen, W. Chen, M. Lei, W. Guo, R. Chen, Y. Peng, and Z. Yu, “CNN-DMA: A predictable and scalable direct memory access engine for convolutional neural network with sliding-window filtering,” in GLSVLSI ’21: Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2021, Virtual Event, USA, June 22-25, 2021 .ACM, 2021, pp. 115–121. [38] S. Min, K. Wu, S. Huang, M. Hidayetoglu, J. Xiong, E. Ebrahimi, D. Chen, and W. W. Hwu, “Large graph convolutional network train-ing with gpu-oriented data communication architecture,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2087–2100, 2021. [39] D. Arfeen, D. Mudigere, A. More, B. Gopireddy, A. Inci, and G. R. Ganger, “Nonuniform-tensor-parallelism: Mitigating GPU failure impact for scaled-up LLM training,” CoRR , vol. abs/2504.06095, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.06095 [40] A. V. Kumar, G. Antichi, and R. Singh, “Aqua: Network-accelerated memory offloading for llms in scale-up GPU domains,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 30 March 2025 - 3April 2025 . ACM, 2025, pp. 48–62. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.1145/3676641.3715983 [41] C. Shou, G. Liu, H. Nie, H. Meng, Y. Zhou, Y. Jiang, W. Lv, Y. Xu, Y. Lu, Z. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Shen, Y. Zhu, and D. Jiang, “Infinitehbd: Building datacenter-scale high-bandwidth domain for LLM with optical circuit switching transceivers,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference, SIGCOMM 2025, S˜ ao Francisco Convent, Coimbra, Portugal, September 8-11, 2025 . ACM, 2025, pp. 1–23. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750468