Title: floatsom_v4

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26555v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:47:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# FloatSOM: GPU-Accelerated, Distributed, 

# Topology-Flexible Self-Organizing Maps 

Tony Xu tony.xu@anu.edu.au 

John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University 

Sarah Klamt 

Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zürich 

Katherine Turner 

Mathematical Data Science Centre, Australian National University 

Anne Brüstle 

John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University 

Felix Marsh-Wakefield †

Centenary Institute of Cancer Medicine and Cell Biology 

University of Sydney 

Givanna Putri †

Walter and Eliza Hall Institute  

> †

Givanna Putri and Felix Marsh-Wakefield contributed equally as co-last authors. 

Abstract 

GPU-accelerated Self-Organizing Map (SOM) implementations are among the most com-

petitive options for large-scale SOM analysis, but growing dataset sizes increasingly challenge 

their practical use because workloads no longer fit cleanly within device-memory limits. We 

introduce FloatSOM, a SOM framework for scalable training and deployment that supports 

multi-GPU execution, out-of-memory disk-backed streaming, and novel topologies beyond reg-

ular lattices. We evaluate FloatSOM on 14 synthetic and real benchmark datasets together 

with controlled speed scaling benchmarks, and show that these improved topologies, combined 

with topology-aware hyperparameter fine-tuning, yield lower quantization error than current 

state-of-the-art SOM baselines. FloatSOM also sustains this performance at large scale with 

high-throughput distributed execution; in the largest benchmark, it trains a 1024-node SOM 

network on 1,000,000,000 samples with 50 features in 6.16 minutes on 8 GPUs across two sepa-

rate high-performance-computing nodes. 

## 1 Introduction 

Self-Organizing Map (SOM), originally introduced by Kohonen (Kohonen, 1990), is an unsuper-

vised machine-learning method that uses competitive learning to organize nodes such that they 

capture the topology of the data. In practice, this topology-preserving representation means SOMs 

1are commonly used to map dataset topology, produce dimensionality-reduced visualizations, and 

conduct clustering at scale (Kangas et al., 1990). As dataset size and heterogeneity increase, the 

computational requirements of SOMs grow in both time and memory. Many current implementa-

tions, however, remain constrained to single-device workloads that must fit within video random-

access memory (VRAM, GPU memory), with limited support for distributed compute, out-of-core 

execution, and modern GPU orchestration. 

SOM topology presents a second limitation. Classical SOMs are traditionally trained on regular 

rectangular or hexagonal lattices because fixed grids make neighborhood definition, visualization, 

and optimization straightforward. However, these regular lattices also impose a strong geometric 

prior on the learned representation. Accordingly, prior work on dynamic, growing, and graph-

structured SOM variants reflects a long-standing recognition that fixed lattices are not always 

the best match for irregular data geometry (Alahakoon et al., 2000; Vasighi and Amini, 2017; 

Kangas et al., 1990). However, these alternatives have generally not been developed or evaluated 

in the high-throughput, large-sample regime targeted by modern GPU-enabled applications and 

are broadly impractical for deployment at scale. 

FloatSOM is designed to address these combined systems and topology limitations. Within 

FloatSOM, we implement distributed multi-GPU execution, out-of-memory disk-backed streaming, 

and scalable topology-flexible training beyond standard fixed lattices. Specifically, we implement 

highly scalable minimum-spanning-tree (MST) and relative-neighborhood-graph (RNG) topologies. 

We also evaluate multiple sampling strategies as a route to further computational acceleration 

and derive fine-tuned hyperparameter configurations across diverse datasets and recommended 

operating regimes. FloatSOM is suitable for both high-performance-computing (HPC) operation 

and consumer-grade desktop GPUs. 

## 2 Related Work 

Related work on practical SOM deployment spans software implementations, sampling-e !cient 

training, topology design, and model selection. 

2.1 Open-Source SOM Implementations and Systems 

Open sourced SOM libraries range from lightweight to more performance-oriented implementa-

tions. MiniSom is a compact Python implementation of the classical online regime (Vettigli, 2018), 

whereas XPySOM is a Python-based batch SOM implementation designed for e !cient GPU-backed 

execution (Mancini et al., 2020). At larger scales, Somoclu and GigaSOM provide mature parallel 

SOM systems for large workloads (Wittek et al., 2017; Kratochvíl et al., 2020). However, an im-

portant systems gap remains: XPySOM is limited to a single GPU and requires the full dataset to 

fit in VRAM, while GigaSOM emphasizes distributed CPU execution rather than distributed GPU 

training within a broadly used Python workflow. FloatSOM is intended to address that gap. 

2.2 Sampling Methodologies for SOM Training 

Classical online and batch SOM training schemes traditionally sample every data-point in every 

training iteration (Kohonen, 2001; Liu et al., 2023). Consequently, one obvious route to improving 

SOM speed and scalability is subsampling, which reduces the amount of data used to train the final 

SOM. 

To date, numerous subsampling strategies have been proposed. Beyond naive random sampling, 

guided subsampling methods include hierarchical dynamic subset selection SOM (HDSSSOM), 

2which concentrates computation on di !cult or stale regions of the data (Wetmore et al., 2005), and 

adaptive sampling strategies for design-space exploration (Ito et al., 2016). However, systematically 

benchmarked and openly maintained implementations that compare full-data, random, and guided 

sampling within a modern high-performance SOM workflow remain limited. 

2.3 SOM Lattice and Adaptive Topologies 

Most practical SOM implementations retain regular rectangular or hexagonal lattices because 

they simplify neighborhood indexing, visualization, and vectorized updates (Kohonen, 1990, 2013). 

Hexagonal lattices are often preferred in the literature and serve as the regular-topology baseline 

in this manuscript (White and Kiester, 2008; Kohonen, 2013; Forest et al., 2020). 

The SOM literature has also explored alternatives to fixed lattices, including dynamic maps and 

graph-structured neighborhoods (Vasighi and Amini, 2017; Spanakis and Weiss, 2016; Kangas et al., 

1990; Jang et al., 2009). However, these alternatives have not been assessed on large-scale datasets 

and do not have implementations that are either publicly available or suitable for distributed GPU 

computation. None of the current distributed or GPU SOM implementations support these non-

lattice topologies. 

Relative Neighborhood Graphs (RNGs) (Toussaint, 1980) are of particular interest in presently; 

we return to the full rationale and implementation for RNG in Section 3.2.2. 

2.4 Hyperparameter Optimization and Fair Comparison 

SOM performance depends strongly on parameters such as map size, initialization, learning-rate 

schedule, and neighborhood schedule. Prior work shows that these choices can substantially a "ect 

observed performance (Akinduko et al., 2016; Forest et al., 2020). This makes comparisons based 

only on untuned defaults di !cult to interpret. 

More generally, modern machine-learning workflows increasingly rely on automated hyperpa-

rameter optimization rather than manual tuning alone. Tools such as Optuna provide bounded 

search over large hyperparameter spaces and can support multi-objective optimization, allowing 

parameter settings to be selected with respect to several benchmark criteria simultaneously rather 

than collapsed into a single score (Akiba et al., 2019). 

## 3 Methods 

FloatSOM combines four methodological components: sample selection, topology definition, SOM 

updates, and the compute architecture used to execute them. The framework supports random, 

full, and HDSSSOM sampling; rectangular, hexagonal, MST, and RNG topologies; and execution 

modes ranging from local GPU training to single-node and multi-node multi-GPU operation. Hy-

perparameter optimization is treated as a separate layer applied across these configurations. Figure 

1 summarizes this design. 

3Sample Full Random HDSSOM Training (Batch) Topology Rectangular Hexagonal RNG MST Compute Framework Local GPU Single -Node Multi -GPU Multi -Node GPU Figure 1. Schematic overview of the FloatSOM methods framing used in this manuscript. Sample selection 

and topology definition have configurable components that feed into the standard SOM training step, while 

the compute architecture determines how that same training procedure is executed in practice. The options 

shown here summarize the FloatSOM configurations discussed in the following subsections. 

3.1 Sampling Selector Mathematics 

This section formalizes the sampling policies evaluated in this manuscript. 

Let the full dataset be X = {xi}N

> i=1

, where N is the total number of samples in the dataset. 

Let m denote the number of samples presented to the SOM in a given training iteration, or the 

sampling budget. This budget is either fixed directly or determined as a proportion ω of the dataset: 

m =







m0, if a fixed budget is specified ,

max(1 , →N ω↑) , if a dataset proportion is used . (1) 

For index sets I(s) 

> t

at iteration t, the implemented full and random selectors are: 

Ifull  

> t

= {1, . . . , N }, Irandom  

> t

↓ Unif( {I ↔ {1, . . . , N } : |I| = m}) , m < N. (2) 

If m ↗ N , random returns the full dataset (no subsampling). Otherwise, to avoid biasing 

training toward a single fixed subsample, the random selector redraws Irandom  

> t

from the entire 

dataset at every training iteration. The selected training subset is X(s) 

> t

= {xi : i ↘ I(s) 

> t

}. Because 

random subsampling draws uniformly from size-m subsets, we are able to better obtain coverage 

over the full dataset. 

HDSSSOM is implemented in multi-GPU-compatible form as an adaptive sampler that prefer-

entially revisits di !cult, under-trained, or stale samples (Wetmore et al., 2005). 

43.2 Topology Definition 

After initialization, neighborhood relations are defined by the selected topology. For regular-lattice 

baselines, we support both grid and hexagonal layouts. Consistent with prior SOM guidance, we 

treat hexagonal as the standard reference topology in this manuscript. We implement the hexagonal 

lattice topology in accordance with (Vettigli, 2018). For MST and RNG, neighborhood structure 

is derived from the current node-weight geometry using the methodologies below. 

Note that regardless of the selected topology, FloatSOM uses the same node-weight initialization 

options. Initialization determines only the starting node weights; neighborhood relations are applied 

afterward according to the selected topology to establish node connections, keeping the initial state 

comparable across regular-lattice and graph-based runs. 

3.2.1 MST Topology Implementation 

The MST topology replaces fixed lattice neighborhood distance with graph hop distance on a 

minimum spanning tree built from current SOM nodes. For P nodes in feature dimension d, the 

pairwise node-distance matrix is formed with the standard squared-distance Gram identity, which 

avoids 3D broadcast tensors and preserves O(P 2d) dense linear-algebra structure. 

In a standard lattice SOM, neighborhood distance is determined by fixed node grid coordinates, 

which are assigned before training and are independent of the learned node-weight geometry in data 

space. MST instead uses the node weight vectors to locate the nodes in data space, then calculates 

the minimum spanning tree between those node locations (Kruskal, 1956). The node distances 

therefore determine which tree edges are selected, while the neighborhood distance used by the 

Gaussian update is the graph hop distance along the resulting tree. Topology-derived influence 

matrices are cached and refreshed according to the topology-refresh schedule. 

At the beginning of training, the topology is refreshed every iteration: the previous tree edges 

are discarded, pairwise distances are recalculated from the updated node weights, and the MST is 

recomputed from those updated node locations. The refresh rate then decays as training proceeds, 

so topology updates become less frequent later in training. If the current iteration does not trigger 

recomputation, the previous graph state and cached influences are reused. Otherwise, the MST is 

recalculated and the influence cache is rebuilt. 

Algorithm 1 Dynamic MST topology update with refresh-triggered recomputation and cached 

influence reuse.  

> 1:

Input: node weights Wt, iteration t, topology-refresh policy  

> 2:

Output: topology state (Et, g t, cached influences ) 

> 3:

Query the refresh policy for the current iteration  

> 4:

if no topology refresh is due then  

> 5:

return previous topology state  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Compute pairwise squared node distances on GPU  

> 8:

Transfer distances to CPU and run Kruskal to obtain MST edges Et 

> 9:

Build adjacency from Et 

> 10:

Compute all-pairs graph hop distances gt with chunked GPU Floyd-Warshall  

> 11:

Deduplicate active radii and rebuild/update cached influence maps  

> 12:

Commit Et, gt, and cache state  

> 13:

return topology state 

53.2.2 RNG Topology Implementation 

Our RNG topology constructs a Relative Neighborhood Graph over current node distances us-

ing the standard RNG criterion (Toussaint, 1980). Unlike MST, RNG is not restricted to a single 

spanning-tree backbone, so multiple locally supported neighborhood relations can be retained. Con-

ceptually, the absence of this restriction permits the RNG topology to represent both tree-like and 

denser mesh-like local structures simultaneously throughout the training process. Consequently, 

we hypothesise that this greater freedom in topology will allow RNG-based SOM maps to better 

represent a variety of distributions. 

Algorithm 2 Dynamic RNG topology update with refresh-triggered recomputation and cached 

influence reuse.  

> 1:

Input: node weights Wt, iteration t, topology-refresh policy  

> 2:

Output: topology state (Et, g t, cached influences ) 

> 3:

Query the refresh policy for the current iteration  

> 4:

if no topology refresh is due then  

> 5:

return previous topology state  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Compute pairwise squared node distances on GPU  

> 8:

Evaluate RNG candidate elimination in chunks using the blocker test  

> 9:

Retain surviving RNG edges Et and build adjacency  

> 10:

Compute all-pairs graph hop distances gt with chunked GPU Floyd-Warshall  

> 11:

Deduplicate active radii and rebuild/update cached influence maps  

> 12:

Commit Et, gt, and cache state  

> 13:

return topology state 

3.3 Multi-GPU + Larger-Than-Memory Methodology and Implementation 

FloatSOM is implemented for distributed GPU execution, with support for RAM (Random Access 

Memory, CPU memory) spilling and disk-backed execution when datasets exceed available VRAM 

and RAM, respectively. 

6GPU 1 GPU 2 GPU n Distribute data to local storage Data store CPU GPU Chunks loaded into Pinned Memory Loading / Compute CUDA streams Disk Reading Find BMUs Compute Local Updates NCCL Sync Updates Normalise & Apply Weight Updates xnchunks x iterations Direct RAM Path (Disk -Loader Bypass )4321Loading Compute Node 1 Node 2 Node n Figure 2. Multi-GPU data loading and NCCL synchronization schematic. In disk-backed mode, data 

are sharded to worker-local storage, loaded chunk-wise into pinned host memory, transferred to GPU with 

transfer overlapped with compute, processed locally, and synchronized by NCCL all-reduce before one weight 

update per iteration. In RAM mode, data are instead pre-sharded into worker-local CPU RAM and follow 

the same pinned-memory-to-GPU path without disk reads. 

3.3.1 General Multi-GPU Logic 

Distributed execution uses Ray actors with one GPU per worker and NCCL collectives for syn-

chronous aggregation (Moritz et al., 2018). At each iteration, every worker processes its assigned 

shard locally in n_chunks , accumulates worker-local statistics across those chunks, and synchronizes 

7once per iteration. 

For worker g ↘ {1, . . . , G }, let X(s) 

> t,g

denote the worker-local shard of the selected iteration subset 

X(s) 

> t

. Let j index SOM nodes, let w(t) 

> j

denote the weight vector of node j at iteration t, let b(x)

denote the best-matching unit (BMU) of sample x under the current weights, let h(t) 

> j,b (x)

denote the 

iteration-t neighborhood influence between node j and the BMU (Best Matching Unit)of x, and let 

εt denote the learning rate at iteration t. The local accumulators are: 

U (g) 

> j

= ∑

> x→X(s)
> t,g

εt h(t)

> j,b (x)

(x ≃ w(t) 

> j

),

H(g) 

> j

= ∑

> x→X(s)
> t,g

h(t)

> j,b (x)

.

(3) 

U (g) 

> j

is worker g’s summed learning-rate-scaled displacement for node j, and H(g) 

> j

is the corre-

sponding summed neighborhood influence used to normalize that displacement. 

Global synchronized accumulators are: 

Uj =

> G∑
> g=1

U (g) 

> j

,

Hj =

> G∑
> g=1

H(g) 

> j

.

(4) 

In implementation, U (g) 

> j

and H(g) 

> j

are accumulated across the worker’s n_chunks and synchro-

nized once per iteration. After synchronization, Uj and Hj define the global update numerator and 

normalization denominator for node j. Under weighted normalization, the normalized update is 

given by Uj /H j up to numerical safeguards; optional momentum is then added to this normalized 

update before applying the resulting change to the node weight w(t) 

> j

.

3.3.2 Multi-GPU Implementation Details 

As shown in Fig. 2, each worker uses a chunked loading path from CPU memory to GPU memory. 

In streaming mode, data are distributed to worker-local disk shards and then read chunk-by-chunk 

into pinned host memory before transfer to GPU; in RAM mode, data are pre-sharded into worker-

local CPU RAM and follow the same pinned-memory path without disk reads. FloatSOM overlaps 

data transfer and compute across CUDA streams, uses JIT-compiled kernels (Just-In-Time) for the 

core BMU and update steps, and synchronizes worker-local accumulators once per iteration with 

NCCL all-reduce. Weights therefore remain resident on worker GPUs across iterations. For large 

topologies that would otherwise exceed VRAM, FloatSOM also supports spilling the associated 

graph-distance or influence structures from VRAM to system RAM. 

3.3.3 Larger-Than-Memory Capable Topology Updates 

Additional larger-than-memory support for topology updates is provided through topological chunk-

ing. Topological chunking applies the same idea to topology-side computations within each worker. 

When graph-distance or influence structures would otherwise exceed a worker’s VRAM, those 

computations are tiled and evaluated in bounded pieces rather than materialized at once. This 

topology-side chunking is not depicted in the Fig. 2 data path, but it follows the same per-worker 

bounded-memory execution rule. 

83.4 Multi-Objective Hyperparameter Optimization 

We use Optuna as an automated multi-objective hyperparameter optimization tool to derive near-

optimal performance and corresponding hyperparameters for each FloatSOM configuration under 

a given sampling and topology combination (Akiba et al., 2019). 

## 4 Experimental Setup 

We use two benchmark protocols: an Optuna quality benchmark and a speed scaling benchmark. 

The first evaluates algorithmic quality and tuned attainable performance, and the second evaluates 

runtime and distributed scaling behavior. All production Optuna and speed benchmarks reported 

in this manuscript were executed on Gadi at the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI), 

Australia, on gpuvolta nodes (HPC), using a consistent multi-GPU environment across runs. 

4.1 Optuna benchmark protocol 

We use Optuna-based multi-objective optimization to determine the best attainable performance 

and corresponding hyperparameters for each sampling (full and random) and topology (hexagonal, 

MST, and RNG) combination, optimizing jointly for train and holdout quantization error ( QE T

and QE H ). In this protocol, each dataset-topology-sampling configuration is optimized for 200 

trials across 10 seeds under variant-appropriate search constraints. The reported runs used the 

standard in-memory batch path rather than the Ray-distributed execution stack. This corresponds 

to: 

14 Datasets ⇐ 10 Seeds ⇐ 3Topologies ⇐ 2SamplingMethods ⇐ 200 Trials = 168 ,000 Runs 

Sampling comparisons in Section 5.2 compare full versus random paired analyses pooled across 

all topologies. Topology comparisons in Sections 5.3-5.4 use full sampling runs across hexago-

nal, MST, and RNG. Otherwise, the remaining analyses use full sampling. A separate focused 

HDSSSOM pilot is reported in Section 5.2 and summarized in Supplementary Table S2. This 

pilot additionally included the HDSSSOM sampling methodology alongside the full and random 

sampling methodologies. 

4.1.1 Optuna benchmark datasets and preprocessing 

The Optuna benchmark uses 14 synthetic and real scikit-learn datasets spanning low- and high-

dimensional regimes (Pedregosa et al., 2011); dataset metadata are listed in Supplementary Table 

S1. Synthetic datasets are generated according to the random seed, whereas real datasets are 

loaded directly from sklearn. Across the Optuna protocol, inputs are standardized feature-wise 

to zero mean and unit variance using StandardScaler , then deterministically permuted and split 

into fixed 70/30 train-holdout partitions. We retain both partitions to evaluate both training-set 

representation and transfer to unseen samples. 

4.1.2 Optuna quality metrics 

Our primary quality metric is Quantization Error ( QE ) (Kohonen, 2001). We report QE on both 

the training partition ( QE T ) and the holdout partition ( QE H ). The training value reflects how 

well the fitted SOM represents the samples it was trained on, whereas the holdout value evaluates 

the same trained map after projecting previously unseen samples onto it. The holdout partition is 

9therefore not used during fitting; it is used only to evaluate the trained map, analogous to a test 

set in conventional model-training workflows. 

Balanced QE , denoted QE B , is defined as the mean of QE T and QE H . QE B is therefore a 

composite endpoint that weights data representation fidelity (train) and generalisability (holdout) 

equally. Note that in the Optuna runs, QE T and QE H are optimized jointly as a two-objective 

vector, with QE B only calculated post hoc .

4.2 Speed scaling benchmark protocol 

The speed scaling benchmark evaluates runtime and distributed scaling behavior in di "erent com-

pute and algorithm configurations. Speed scaling is evaluated with runs across G ↘ {1, 2, 4, 8}

GPUs under a series of fixed scaling protocols. Runtime summaries are computed from repeated 

executions per configuration and reported as both absolute training time and e !ciency relative to 

the corresponding 1-GPU comparison. We compute scaling e !ciency as EG = ( T1/T G)/G ⇐ 100% ,

where T1 is the 1-GPU runtime and TG is the runtime on G GPUs. A value of 100% corresponds 

to ideal linear scaling; lower values indicate that communication, orchestration, or I/O overhead 

has reduced the realized speedup, while values above 100% can occur when additional GPUs also 

change the memory or data-staging regime. These scaling runs use the Ray-orchestrated distributed 

execution layer built on top of the standard FloatSOM training path (Moritz et al., 2018). Ac-

cordingly, the scaling figures in Sections 6.1-6.2 and the runtime/scaling comparison reported later 

against XPySOM should be interpreted as distributed-execution results rather than the in-memory 

Optuna path. 

For scaling-e !ciency calculations, when a single-GPU baseline was missing at a given axis value 

due to timeout, we estimated that baseline by local linear extrapolation from the last available 1-

GPU point on the same curve. That is, runtime was assumed to scale proportionally with the axis 

variable for the extrapolation step (for example, doubling sample count or doubling dimensionality 

doubles the estimated 1-GPU runtime). 

Topology speed comparisons include hexagonal, MST, and RNG, with harmonized workload 

settings so ratios isolate topology-associated runtime e "ects. A dedicated random versus full com-

parison, run on G ↘ {1, 2, 4} GPUs, is additionally included to isolate sampling-specific runtime 

e"ects independently of the multi-GPU scaling runs. 

4.2.1 Scaling benchmark datasets 

The speed benchmark uses synthetic random matrices with uniform values in [0 , 1] . No train-

holdout split is used here because the objective is runtime rather than generalization, so all gener-

ated data are used for training. We use a shared default configuration of 10 7 samples, 50 dimensions, 

a 32 ⇐ 32 SOM grid, and 10 training iterations, and then vary one workload axis at a time: sample 

count ( 10 6–10 9), feature dimension (50–5000), or grid side length (8–64). The exact axis values 

used for each scaling panel are provided in Supplementary Table S3. 

Additional CPU and RAM resources attached to each GPU are scaled linearly with GPU count 

while keeping the software environment and benchmark procedure consistent across runs. For 

scaling benchmarks, each run is timed out if it exceeds 30 minutes of wall time. Per-GPU resource 

allocation is fixed at one NVIDIA V100 (32 GB VRAM), 12 CPU cores, 90 GB system RAM, with 

one full node comprising 4 GPUs and their associated CPUs, and with 400 GB of associated local 

disk storage. 

10 4.3 Hyperparameter Tuning and Stability 

To quantify parameter-tuning benefit, we performed an explicit paired analysis between the tuned 

configuration and the XPySOM untuned default reference. For each sampling mode and topology 

combination, we first extracted the parameter settings from the best-performing Optuna runs under 

the benchmark objective for that combination. We then distilled these per-seed best-performing 

tuned settings into deployable default configurations by taking the mean of numeric parameters 

and the mode of categorical parameters. 

The stability analysis focuses on four tuned hyperparameters that govern SOM training dynam-

ics. These settings determine how the map is initialized and how updates evolve over training: the 

initial radius sets the early neighborhood scale around each BMU, the initialization method sets 

the starting node weights, the radius decay type controls the shift from broad global organization 

toward local refinement, and the momentum-use parameter determines whether each update retains 

part of the previous update direction. 

4.3.1 Tuned Configuration versus Untuned Reference Analysis 

This fixed derived configuration was then rerun and paired against the untuned default XPySOM 

(hexagonal) reference within matched dataset, seed, and dataset-split units. 

Dataset-wise tuned configuration versus untuned reference summaries use the same forest-plot 

convention. The global overall summary pools all matched tuned configuration versus untuned ref-

erence pairs across datasets and applies the same paired t-test and confidence-interval construction 

to that pooled paired set. 

4.3.2 Hyperparameter stability and dataset-type stratification 

Hyperparameter stability is important because it determines whether a method can be deployed 

reliably without bespoke retuning. We therefore extracted the top-ranked tuned Optuna trial 

separately for each seed and compared the recovered hyperparameter values across seeds. We 

define hyperparameter stability as the variation in these recovered settings. For numeric parameters, 

stability is measured by the relative di "erence between runs, |a≃b|/ max( |a|, |b|, ϑ), where a and b are 

the values of a given parameter for the two compared seeds and ϑ = 10 ↑12 . These relative di "erences 

are then averaged across numeric parameters, with lower values indicating higher stability. For 

categorical parameters, stability is defined as the mismatch rate across the same seed pairs. We 

report both mean per-parameter stability and an equal-weight overall stability summary across 

datasets. 

4.4 Statistical analysis 

All Optuna comparisons use matched pairs within dataset, seed, and split units to control for 

substantial between-run heterogeneity. Within each matched unit, trials were ranked by the target 

metric, the top five were retained, and each condition was summarized by the median of those 

retained trials, yielding a top-k summary with k = 5 intended to estimate near-optimal attainable 

performance under a fixed Optuna budget. Paired e "ects were then computed as simple condition 

di "erences, with negative values favoring the first condition for lower-is-better metrics. Dataset-

level and global summaries are shown as forest plots with 95% confidence intervals from two-sided 

paired one-sample t-tests; top-k sensitivity analyses are provided in the Supplementary figures. 

11 5 Results 

5.1 XPySOM calibration (Equivalence) 

Under matched-configuration XPySOM versus FloatSOM calibration on hexagonal QE (Fig. S3), 

the two implementations perform equivalently, with no detected QE di "erences. Accordingly, we 

treat hexagonal FloatSOM batch as a valid proxy for XPySOM in the benchmarks that follow. The 

runtime di "erences are attributable to FloatSOM’s JIT kernels, which incur a small startup cost. 

This overhead is progressively amortized as workload size increases, after which FloatSOM runs 

faster than XPySOM on larger datasets. 

5.2 Comparison of Di !erent Sampling Methods 

We first report a focused HDSSSOM pilot as an elimination comparison rather than as part of the 

broader sampling benchmark. This pilot used a smaller, more limited configuration than the later 

full versus random analysis and is summarized in Supplementary Table S2. 

Under that pilot configuration, HDSSSOM was materially worse than full sampling. In the 

hexagonal view shown in Fig. 3, full outperformed HDSSSOM in all 50 paired comparisons (10 

datasets ⇐ 5 seeds; 50 wins, 0 losses, 0 ties), with dataset-level median balanced-QE improvements 

ranging from 2.5% to 209.7% and a global median improvement of 38.7%. Given these large 

di "erences, we focused on the full and random sampling methodologies for the remainder of the 

manuscript. ← Favours HDSSSOM | Favours Full → Figure 3: Full versus HDSSSOM on Pilot Dataset blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE change (%) 

Figure 3. HDSSSOM screening pilot on QE B (hexagonal topology): full vs HDSSSOM, using the smaller 

pilot configuration summarized in Supplementary Table S2 (10 datasets, 5 seeds, with all other pilot settings 

held fixed). Panels report dataset-matched paired top-k within-unit medians plus dataset-level paired-e "ect 

summaries (Section 4.3). Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean 

paired e "ect. 

The full versus random analysis in Fig. 4 was generated from matched hexagonal Optuna runs 

in which the sampling selector was switched from full to random. E"ects were computed within 

matched seed-specific units and then summarized across seeds. Fig. 4A-C summarize the matched 

full versus random paired e "ects for balanced, holdout, and train QE , respectively, showing that 

full sampling generally provides equal or better QE than random sampling. Notably, this full versus 

random separation is much smaller than the full versus HDSSSOM pilot e "ect shown in Fig. 3; in 

12 most dataset-level comparisons, the full versus HDSSSOM improvement is at least twice as large -

as evidenced by the di "erence in axis scales between Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 

We find the e "ectiveness of random sampling relative to full sampling is scale-dependent. Above 

10 ,000 samples, paired QE di "erences are not meaningfully detected, whereas in smaller datasets 

the random arm shows higher variability and less stable outcomes (Fig. 4D-F). This is consistent 

with reduced per-iteration sample support under random subsampling (Fig. 4D-F). In this bench-

mark, the > 10 ,000 regime is therefore a useful practical proxy for more stable random sampling 

behavior. Figure 4: Full vs Random Outcomes and Dataset-Size Regression (Hexagonal) blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE DBalanced QE EHoldout QE FTrain QE QE change (%) ← Favours Random | Favours Full → QE difference (%) Sample size (log10) ← Favours Random | Favours Full → 

Figure 4. Full versus random sampling under the hexagonal topology. Panels A-C report paired full-versus-

random e "ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T . Panels D-F show the corresponding dataset-size regressions for 

the same three metrics, with numbered datasets keyed in Supplementary Table S1. In the larger-dataset 

regime observed here (>10,000 samples), little paired QE separation is detected; at smaller dataset scales, 

random is more variable and less stable. 

Nevertheless, full sampling remains the best sampling strategy for optimal QE results. Accord-

ingly, all remaining analyses reported below rely on full sampling unless specified. 

5.3 Topology Results 

Topology comparisons are reported with QE -only metrics, with the Optuna hexagonal batch set-

ting as the primary regular-topology baseline; Fig. 5 provides a qualitative illustration of the 

neighborhood structures produced by hexagonal, MST, and RNG. 

13 Figure 5: Representative Topology on sklearn Circles AHexagonal BMST CRNG Data points SOM nodes Connections Figure 5. Representative neighborhood node and connection overlays for default XPySOM hexagonal, 

MST, and RNG runs on a 30,000 data-point synthetic sklearn circles dataset. 

5.3.1 MST 

We report dataset-wise paired improvement summaries (hexagonal over MST) with the same re-

porting logic as Section 5.1 in Fig. 6. 

Overall, MST outperforms matched hexagonal on balanced QE (Fig. 6A), indicating a net 

advantage across train and holdout performance. This aggregate gain is driven more clearly by 

train QE (Fig. 6C), while holdout QE is more mixed across datasets (Fig. 6B) and shows no 

clear overall holdout advantage. The overall paired t-test p-values are balanced QE (p=1.12e-05), 

holdout QE (p=0.15), and train QE (p=0.0064). ← Favours MST | Favours Hexagonal → Figure 6: Hexagonal vs MST Across QE Metrics blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE change (%) 

Figure 6. Hexagonal versus MST topology on QE metrics under full sampling only. Panels A-C report 

paired full sampling only QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T across the available full sampling datasets. 

Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

5.3.2 RNG 

To evaluate RNG topology performance, we reuse the paired reporting logic on hexagonal versus 

RNG, again centered on QE B with QE H and QE T in Fig. 7. 

14 RNG has lower QE than matched hexagonal on the reported QE metrics (Fig. 7A-C), with 

overall paired t-test p-values of balanced QE (p=7.4e-10), holdout QE (p=0.0232), and train QE 

(p=4.69e-06). 

The main trend in Fig. 7 is that RNG improves on hexagonal most clearly in balanced QE and 

especially in train QE, with the separation most apparent in the real and larger datasets where the 

added flexibility of the graph neighborhood appears more useful than the fixed regular lattice. ← Favours RNG | Favours Hexagonal → Figure 7: Hexagonal vs RNG Across QE Metrics blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE change (%) 

Figure 7. Hexagonal versus RNG topology on QE metrics under full sampling only. Panels A-C report 

paired full sampling only QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T across the available full sampling datasets. 

Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

5.4 Hyperparameter Tuning and Stability 

5.4.1 Performance Gains from Hyperparameter Tuning 

To quantify the practical benefit of deploying tuned settings, we compare tuned and untuned 

configurations in Fig. 8 using pooled topology-level QE summaries. Topology-stratified versions 

of the same comparison are provided in Figs. S8-S10. The tuned configurations are the Section 4.3 

derived settings, and the untuned reference is the default XPySOM configuration. Broadly, tuning 

yields substantial and significant QE improvement. 

15 ← Favours Default | Favours Tuned → Figure 8: Tuned vs Default Across QE Metrics blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE change (%) Figure 8. Tuned configuration versus untuned reference QE comparison across QE B , QE H , and QE T ,

pooled across all topology runs under the matched pairing keys. Positive values indicate the tuned con-

figuration outperforms the untuned reference; the global overall row pools all matched tuned configura-

tion/untuned reference pairs across datasets. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals 

around the mean paired e "ect. 

At the pooled overall level, the paired summaries across all matched tuned configuration/untuned 

reference pairs also favor tuning for all three metrics, consistent with the per-dataset pattern in 

Fig. 8. The same tuning pat-

tern is observed across topologies, indicating that tuning a "ects all topology families rather than a 

single-architecture artifact. 

5.4.2 Hyperparameter Stability Across Topology and Sampling 

To assess whether the derived hyperparameters are robust across runs and datasets, we compare 

the within-topology seed-to-seed tuned-parameter drift (Section 4.3.2). Overall, MST and RNG 

exhibits less variability in performance compared to hexagons (Fig. 9A using full dataset, 9B using 

random sampling). Across these panels, full sampling is generally the more stable setting. Mirroring 

the sample-size-dependent QE performance, Fig. 9C shows that random sampling hyperparameter 

stability also improves with increasing sample size. 

16 Figure 9: Hyperparameter Stability AFull sampling BRandom sampling CRandom Sampling QE by Sample Size Overall Stability Score Figure 9. Hyperparameter stability by sampling mode. A: selected parameter stability under full sampling 

for hexagonal, MST, and RNG topologies (lower stability score is better). B: selected parameter stability 

under random sampling for the same topologies. C: dataset-size stability regression under random sampling, 

using the selected parameter stability score against sample size (log10) across the included topology families. 

## 6 Speed Scaling 

We next examine three aspects of FloatSOM runtime performance: the cost of full relative to ran-

dom sampling, the scaling behavior obtained with additional GPUs, and the runtime implications 

of MST and RNG relative to a hexagonal topology. 

6.1 Random versus Full Sampling Runtime 

We report sample scaling runtime comparisons for full versus random sampling using the synthetic 

datasets as outlined in Section 4.2.1. We stratify by hexagonal, MST, and RNG, for 1, 2, and 4 

GPUs (Fig. 10). Figure 10: Sampling Runtime A1 GPU B2 GPUs C4 GPUs 

Figure 10. Sample scaling runtime comparison of full versus random sampling across G ↘ {1, 2, 4} GPUs 

(A,B,C). Curves report mean wall-clock training time (s) under harmonized settings; error bars denote ±1

standard deviation across n = 3 repeated runs per configuration. Color encodes topology (hexagonal, MST, 

RNG), and line style encodes sampling mode (full vs. random). Shaded x-axis regions indicate sample-size 

ranges that could not be run in that panel relative to the shared axis maximum due to timeouts. Lower 

values indicate faster execution. 

17 Across topologies, random sampling is faster than full sampling across all 1-, 2-, and 4-GPU 

comparisons, with similar proportional reductions at a given dataset size. With more GPUs, larger 

datasets can also be processed before timing out, although the runtime advantage of random over 

full narrows at the largest sample counts. 

For the 1-GPU random sampling runs, the last successful 1-GPU run was at 100M samples, 

the same number of samples as run on full samples, despite random being much faster. We reason 

that the failed subsequent runs on larger samples were due to the transition from RAM operation 

to disk-backed operation. Even in random sampling mode, the implementation still stages the full 

dataset initially and loads full chunks before the subsampler selects the training samples. Therefore, 

the relevant cost is no longer only the reduced number of selected samples. We therefore treat the 

1-GPU random failure at 500M samples as a disk-mode systems limitation rather than as evidence 

against the general random versus full runtime ordering. 

6.2 Multi-GPU topology scaling and Larger-Than-Memory context 

To examine parallel scaling, we benchmarked FloatSOM under full sampling across G ↘ {1, 2, 4, 8}

GPUs using workload-scaling benchmarks that extend from standard in-memory settings to larger 

workloads that exceed available memory. Across these increasingly demanding loads, runtime and 

e!ciency show a broadly consistent scaling pattern, with stable behaviour regardless of topology 

(Figs. 11 and S11). 

18 Figure 11: Multi-GPU Full-Batch Scaling (RNG) ADimension Scaling BSample Scaling CGrid-Size Scaling DDimension Scaling (Efficiency) ESample Scaling (Efficiency) FGrid-Size Scaling (Efficiency) Figure 11. Multi-GPU scaling across G ↘ {1, 2, 4, 8} GPUs. Panels A-C show runtime (s) for dimension, 

sample, and grid size scaling workloads, respectively. Panels D-F show scaling e !ciency for the same 

workloads, computed from the single-GPU baseline and the corresponding G-GPU runtime. Runtime error 

bars denote ±1 standard deviation across n = 3 repeated runs per configuration; the 100% e !ciency reference 

line indicates ideal linear scaling. 

6.2.1 GPU Scaling and Larger-Than-Memory Runtime Performance 

Fig. 11 shows that increasing GPU count improves performance in the sample scaling regime 

by increasing parallel throughput and delaying the transition to disk-backed execution. In the 

sample scaling benchmark, the 500,000,000 sample dataset requires disk backing under the 2-GPU 

configuration, whereas the 8-GPU configuration remains in RAM mode until the 1,000,000,000 

sample dataset; when staging is still required, the disk-to-GPU path is distributed across more 

nodes. The 8-GPU RNG configuration processes 1,000,000,000 samples in 369.41 s (6.16 min). 

Note that this speed includes the time required to transfer data from shared storage to node-local 

shards, alongside the overhead associated with operating across multiple HPC nodes. 

The grid size scaling panel proves to be the main exception: at the largest tested grid size (64), 

runtime shortens from 934.01 s (15.57 min) on 1 GPU to only 880.83 s (14.68 min) on 8 GPUs, a 

5.69% reduction, indicating that once map-size/topology-refresh costs dominate, additional GPUs 

contribute little extra speedup. 

19 6.2.2 GPU Scaling E !ciency 

We next consider GPU e !ciency under strong scaling, relative to ideal linear scaling. At smaller 

dataset sizes, e !ciency is lower. As workload size increases, e !ciency rises sharply and in some 

regions exceeds 100%. When a direct 1-GPU baseline was unavailable at a given axis value, the 

e!ciency denominator was constructed by local linear extrapolation from the last available 1-GPU 

point on that curve (Section 4.2), so some values should be interpreted with care if the underlying 

1-GPU runtime is nonlinear over that range. Fig. 11 shows the scaling for the RNG topology, 

while Fig. S11 shows the corresponding supplementary hexagonal and MST outputs, which follow 

the same overall pattern. 

6.3 Topology Runtime Comparisons 

With that systems context in place, we next compare topology runtimes across hexagonal, MST, 

and RNG configurations on 8 GPUs (Fig. 12). Figure 12: Topology Runtime Comparison (8 GPUs, Full Batch) ADimension Scaling BSample Scaling CGrid-Size Scaling 

Figure 12. Topology runtime comparison at fixed G = 8 GPUs under full sampling. Panels A-C report mean 

wall-clock runtime (s) for dimension, sample, and grid size scaling workloads, respectively, with topology 

traces for hexagonal, MST, and RNG. Error bars denote ±1 standard deviation across n = 3 repeated runs 

per configuration. The largest-axis 8-GPU topology runtime summaries are listed in Supplementary Table 

S11. 

In Fig. 12A-B, the topologies scale similarly as input complexity and data volume increase: 

even at the largest tested axis values, the maximum pairwise runtime spread remains modest at 

dimension scaling (4.70% at 5,000 dimensions) and sample scaling (3.26% at 1,000,000,000 samples). 

However, when the grid itself is enlarged in Fig. 12C, topology-dependent runtime di "erences 

become readily evident. At the largest tested grid size (grid size 64), the 8-GPU mean runtimes 

are 32.54 s (0.54 min) for hexagonal, 266.45 s (4.44 min) for MST, and 880.83 s (14.68 min) for 

RNG, corresponding to 8-GPU MST and RNG runtimes that are 8.19x and 27.07x the hexagonal 

runtime, respectively. 

## 7 Final FloatSOM RNG Comparison with XPySOM 

Fig. 13 demonstrates the QE gains from topology choice and tuning persist in deployment against 

default hexagonal XPySOM. (Mancini et al., 2020). 

20 Figure 13: XPySOM (Default) v FloatSOM RNG ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE DScaling Runtime (4 GPUs) blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL FloatSOM - Full FloatSOM - Random XPySOM - Default Figure 13. Integrated deployment comparison of default hexagonal XPySOM versus tuned FloatSOM 

RNG. Panels A-C compare QE B , QE H , and QE T using the untuned hexagonal XPySOM baseline against 

matched tuned FloatSOM RNG full sampling runs. Panel D provides the scaling/runtime context for the 

same comparison. 

At the overall level, Fig. 13 shows median percentage improvements of QE B (14.5%); QE H

(9.1%); and QE T (22.5%) for tuned FloatSOM RNG relative to default hexagonal XPySOM, 

capturing the combined deployment e "ect of topology choice and tuning on QE .

For the default hexagonal XPySOM reference in Fig. 13, workloads beyond the 10 8-sample 

case were not processed because they exceeded available VRAM and XPySOM requires the full 

dataset to be loaded into memory. Taken together, Fig. 13 shows the point at which the workload 

size is large enough to warrant the extra startup overhead incurred by tuned FloatSOM RNG: 

tuned FloatSOM RNG delivers better QE than the default hexagonal XPySOM baseline, while 

also running faster and scaling to larger workloads. 

## 8 Discussion 

This manuscript introduces FloatSOM as a GPU-oriented SOM framework that combines topology 

flexibility, out-of-memory execution, and distributed multi-GPU training in a single implementa-

tion. The study also provides a unified empirical analysis of sampling strategy, graph-based versus 

fixed-lattice topology, topology-aware hyperparameter tuning, and workload scaling across syn-

thetic and real benchmarks. Taken together, these results clarify how algorithmic and systems 

choices jointly shape SOM quality and runtime under practical deployment constraints. 

21 8.1 Sampling tradeo ! (random versus full) 

The sampling trade-o " is strongly scale dependent. In smaller datasets, random subsampling 

produces less stable outcomes, whereas above 10 ,000 samples paired QE di "erences between full 

and random are not meaningfully detected. Full sampling is therefore the safer choice when stability 

is the priority, while random sampling is better viewed as a throughput-oriented option at larger 

scales. In the larger-than-memory regime, this advantage narrows because random still requires 

each worker-local chunk to be read before subsampling, so it reduces compute more directly than 

dataset I/O. 

8.2 Topology Comparisons (MST and RNG) 

Globally, both MST and RNG outperform the fixed hexagonal topology in these comparisons, 

with RNG showing the strongest overall QE results. One interpretation is that this ordering 

reflects increasing structural flexibility across the topology families, with the more flexible graph-

based neighborhoods conforming more e "ectively to the underlying data distribution than the 

fixed lattice baseline (Kohonen, 2013; Kangas et al., 1990; Toussaint, 1980). The denser connected 

structure available under RNG may also provide additional regularization, because nodes can receive 

information from more neighbors during updating rather than being limited to a single tree path. 

This could support more precise local updates, although the present benchmark does not isolate 

that mechanism directly. 

8.3 Tuning benefit under matched defaults 

Across the matched Fig. 8 comparisons, tuned configurations consistently outperform untuned 

reference settings. Hyperparameter tuning should therefore be treated as part of the method 

configuration rather than as optional post-processing. 

The key implication is that topology choice and hyperparameter choice are coupled. Gains 

remain positive across hexagonal, MST, and RNG, so tuning is not confined to a single topology. 

A practical deployment strategy therefore requires topology-aware tuning. 

8.4 Hyperparameter stability and dataset-type interpretation 

The stability results suggest that graph topologies are recovered more consistently than the fixed-

lattice baseline. Hexagonal maps cannot rebuild connectivity once initialized, whereas MST and 

RNG recompute connectivity from the evolving node-weight geometry. It may also help explain 

why the graph topologies are better suited to higher-dimensional, non-synthetic datasets (Kohonen, 

2013; Kangas et al., 1990). 

8.5 Systems implications and limits 

Distributed execution should therefore be interpreted as workload-dependent rather than as a 

uniform multiplicative speedup. At small problem sizes, Ray startup, communication, and staging 

overheads appear to dominate, consistent with the lower e !ciencies observed at the low end of 

the scaling curves. At larger workloads, the sharp rise in e !ciency likely reflects both increased 

parallel throughput and a change in memory regime, where some multi-GPU configurations remain 

in RAM while the 1-GPU baseline has already entered disk-backed execution. Apparent e !ciencies 

above 100% should therefore be interpreted as reflecting this systems transition rather than literal 

super-linear compute scaling. 

22 Overall, these results support a practical deployment strategy that uses RNG with topology-

aware tuned defaults. For optimal speed, consider using the largest number of GPUs available, 

especially if this enables data to be kept in RAM. Sampling should be chosen by scale: full for 

smaller datasets when stability is critical, and random as a throughput-oriented option in the 

larger-dataset regime where optimal QE is not essential. For workloads dominated by very large 

grid size scaling, MST remains a reasonable alternative to RNG and Hexagonal. 

This manuscript presents FloatSOM as a unified large-scale SOM framework that combines a 

novel graph-based topology with sampling options, optimised hyperparameters, and distributed 

out-of-memory GPU execution. This integrated design supports practical SOM deployment at 

scale, where topology choice, sampling, quantization performance, and systems constraints can be 

managed together rather than in isolation. 

## 9 Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by computational resources provided by the Australian Government 

through the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) under the ANU Merit Allocation Scheme. 

We also acknowledge the computational services provided by the University of Bern, the Uni-

versity of Sydney, and the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute. 

We thank Prof. Hanna Suominen for her input and advice. 

## 10 References 

HPC Systems | NCI. https://nci.org.au/our-systems/hpc-systems. 

Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A 

Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework, July 2019. 

Ayodeji A. Akinduko, Evgeny M. Mirkes, and Alexander N. Gorban. SOM: Stochastic initialization 

versus principal components. Information Sciences , 364–365:213–221, October 2016. ISSN 0020-

0255. doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2015.10.013. 

Damminda Alahakoon, Saman Halgamuge, and Srinivasan Bala. Dynamic self-organizing maps with 

controlled growth for knowledge discovery. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 11(3), 601-

614. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on , 11:601–614, June 2000. doi: 10.1109/72.846732. 

Florent Forest, Mustapha Lebbah, Hanane Azzag, and Jérôme Lacaille. A Survey and Implemen-

tation of Performance Metrics for Self-Organized Maps. https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05847v1, 

November 2020. 

Keiichi Ito, Ivo Couckuyt, Roberto d’Ippolito, and Tom Dhaene. Design space exploration using 

Self-Organizing Map based adaptive sampling. Applied Soft Computing , 43:337–346, June 2016. 

ISSN 1568-4946. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2016.02.036. 

Yoo-Jin Jang, Myung-Hoe Huh, and Mi-Ra Park. Use of Minimal Spanning Trees on Self-Organizing 

Maps. Korean Journal of Applied Statistics , 22, January 2009. doi: 10.5351/KJAS.2009.22.2.415. 

J. A. Kangas, T. K. Kohonen, and J. T. Laaksonen. Variants of self-organizing maps. IEEE 

transactions on neural networks , 1(1):93–99, 1990. ISSN 1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72.80208. 

23 T. Kohonen. The self-organizing map. Proceedings of the IEEE , 78(9):1464–1480, September 1990. 

ISSN 1558-2256. doi: 10.1109/5.58325. 

Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps , volume 30 of Springer Series in Information Sciences .

Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001. ISBN 978-3-540-67921-9 978-3-642-56927-2. doi: 10.1007/ 

978-3-642-56927-2. 

Teuvo Kohonen. Essentials of the self-organizing map. Neural Networks: The O !cial Journal 

of the International Neural Network Society , 37:52–65, January 2013. ISSN 1879-2782. doi: 

10.1016/j.neunet.2012.09.018. 

Miroslav Kratochvíl, Oliver Hunewald, Laurent Heirendt, Vasco Verissimo, Ji #í Vondrá $ek, 

Venkata P Satagopam, Reinhard Schneider, Christophe Trefois, and Markus Ollert. GigaSOM.jl: 

High-performance clustering and visualization of huge cytometry datasets. GigaScience , 9(11): 

giaa127, November 2020. ISSN 2047-217X. doi: 10.1093/gigascience/giaa127. 

Joseph B. Kruskal. On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem. 

Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 7(1):48–50, 1956. ISSN 0002-9939, 1088-6826. 

doi: 10.1090/S0002-9939-1956-0078686-7. 

Candace C. Liu, Noah F. Greenwald, Alex Kong, Erin F. McCa "rey, Ke Xuan Leow, Dunja Mrdjen, 

Bryan J. Cannon, Josef Lorenz Rumberger, Sricharan Reddy Varra, and Michael Angelo. Ro-

bust phenotyping of highly multiplexed tissue imaging data using pixel-level clustering. Nature 

Communications , 14(1):4618, August 2023. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-40068-5. 

Riccardo Mancini, Antonio Ritacco, Giacomo Lanciano, and Tommaso Cucinotta. XPySom: High-

Performance Self-Organizing Maps. In 2020 IEEE 32nd International Symposium on Computer 

Architecture and High Performance Computing (SBAC-PAD) , pages 209–216, September 2020. 

doi: 10.1109/SBAC-PAD49847.2020.00037. 

Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, 

Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Ray: A dis-

tributed framework for emerging AI applications. In Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Conference 

on Operating Systems Design and Implementation , OSDI’18, pages 561–577, USA, October 2018. 

USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-931971-47-8. 

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier 

Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, 

Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duch-

esnay. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12 

(85):2825–2830, 2011. ISSN 1533-7928. 

Gerasimos Spanakis and Gerhard Weiss. AMSOM: Adaptive Moving Self-organizing Map for Clus-

tering and Visualization. https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.06047v1, May 2016. 

Godfried T. Toussaint. The relative neighbourhood graph of a finite planar set. Pattern Recognition ,

12(4):261–268, January 1980. ISSN 0031-3203. doi: 10.1016/0031-3203(80)90066-7. 

Mahdi Vasighi and Homa Amini. A directed batch growing approach to enhance the topology 

preservation of self-organizing map. Applied Soft Computing , 55:424–435, June 2017. ISSN 

1568-4946. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2017.02.015. 

24 Giuseppe Vettigli. JustGlowing/minisom, 2018. 

Leigh Wetmore, Malcolm I. Heywood, and A. Nur Zincir-Heywood. Speeding up the Self-Organizing 

Feature Map Using Dynamic Subset Selection. Neural Processing Letters , 22(1):17–32, August 

2005. ISSN 1573-773X. doi: 10.1007/s11063-004-7775-6. 

Denis White and A. Ross Kiester. Topology matters: Network topology a "ects outcomes from 

community ecology neutral models. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems , 32(2):165– 

171, March 2008. ISSN 0198-9715. doi: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2007.11.002. 

Peter Wittek, Shi Chao Gao, Ik Soo Lim, and Li Zhao. Somoclu: An E !cient Parallel Library for 

Self-Organizing Maps. Journal of Statistical Software , 78:1–21, June 2017. ISSN 1548-7660. doi: 

10.18637/jss.v078.i09. 

## 11 Supplementary Tables (End Matter) 

Supplementary Table S1. Dataset metadata and numbered point key for the Figure 4 sampling mode analysis. 

dataset_index dataset dimension_count sample_size dataset_type 

1 iris 4 150 real 

2 wine 13 178 real 

3 olivetti_faces 4096 400 real 

4 diabetes 10 442 real 

5 breast_cancer 30 569 real 

6 digits 64 1797 real 

7 california_housing 8 20640 real 

8 blobs 2 30000 synthetic 

9 circles 2 30000 synthetic 

10 moons 2 30000 synthetic 

11 s_curve 3 30000 synthetic 

12 swiss_roll 3 30000 synthetic 

13 kddcup99 41 494021 real 

14 covertype 54 581012 real 

25 Supplementary Table S2. HDSSSOM pilot configuration summary for Figure 3.                                         

> field value
> pilot purpose Initial HDSSSOM screening before the broader
> sampling comparison
> configuration scope Smaller hexagonal Optuna pilot
> datasets swiss_roll ,moons ,circles ,blobs ,s_curve ,
> breast_cancer ,wine ,iris ,digits ,
> olivetti_faces
> dataset count 10
> seed count 5
> sampling methods present full, random, HDSSSOM
> topology hexagonal
> algorithm family in campaign colors
> optimization split setup evaluation-split=both , yielding QE_H and QE_T ;
> Figure 3 reports paired QE_B
> trials per scenario 200
> main text figure slice hexagonal / full vs HDSSSOM
> Supplementary Table S3. Exact axis values used for the sample count, feature dimension, and grid size
> scaling benchmarks in Section 4.2.1.
> scaling axis exact values
> sample count 10 6,5⇐10 6,10 7,5⇐10 7,10 8,5⇐10 8,10 9
> feature dimension 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000
> grid side length 8, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64

Supplementary Table S4. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration QE summary for 

the MST topology path. The dataset_index column matches the numbered points in Supple-

mentary Figure S1 panel D. See assets/tables/supp_xpysom_calibration_qe_mst.tsv .

Supplementary Table S5. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration QE summary 

for the RNG topology path. The dataset_index column matches the numbered points in 

Supplementary Figure S2 panel D. See assets/tables/supp_xpysom_calibration_qe_rng.tsv .

Supplementary Table S6. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration QE summary for 

the hexagonal topology path. The dataset_index column matches the numbered points in 

Supplementary Figure S3 panel D. See assets/tables/supp_xpysom_calibration_QE_Hexagonal. 

tsv .

Supplementary Table S7. Paired topology comparison p-values for hexagonal versus 

MST and hexagonal versus RNG across balanced QE, holdout QE, and train QE. Rows 

list metric/dataset entries, including the OVERALL row. The MST and RNG columns report p-

values using the manuscript reporting convention. See assets/tables/supp_table_topology_ 

hex_vs_mst_rng_pvalues.tsv .

Supplementary Table S8. Figure 13 deployment comparison percent summary for 

tuned FloatSOM RNG versus default hexagonal XPySOM across QE B , QE H , and QE T .

Rows list per-dataset and GLOBAL_OVERALL entries with the plotted median percent change and 

95% confidence interval. See assets/tables/supp_table_figure_13_xpysom_rng_deployment_ 

summary.tsv .

Supplementary Table S9. Supplementary Figure S12 deployment comparison per-

26 cent summary for tuned FloatSOM hexagonal versus default hexagonal XPySOM 

across QE B , QE H , and QE T . Rows list per-dataset and GLOBAL_OVERALL entries with the 

plotted median percent change and 95% confidence interval. See assets/tables/supp_table_ 

s13_xpysom_hexagonal_deployment_summary.tsv .

Supplementary Table S10. Supplementary Figure S13 deployment comparison per-

cent summary for tuned FloatSOM MST versus default hexagonal XPySOM across 

QE B , QE H , and QE T . Rows list per-dataset and GLOBAL_OVERALL entries with the plotted me-

dian percent change and 95% confidence interval. See assets/tables/supp_table_s14_xpysom_ 

mst_deployment_summary.tsv .

Supplementary Table S11. Figure 12 topology runtime summary at the largest 

common 8-GPU axis value for the dimension, sample, and grid size scaling workloads. 

Rows report the plotted 8-GPU mean runtimes for hexagonal, MST, and RNG, together with the 

fastest and slowest topology at that axis value and the maximum pairwise runtime spread. See 

assets/tables/supp_table_figure_12_topology_runtime_summary.tsv .

27 12 Supplementary Figures (End Matter) 

Supplementary Figure S1. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration under default settings for the MST topol-

ogy path. Panels A-C report paired QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T . Panel D reports dataset-level 

median runtime deltas against dataset size, where each numbered dot is the median matched-seed value 

of FloatSOM time - XPySOM time ; negative values favor FloatSOM and positive values favor XPySOM. 

The point numbers map to Supplementary Table S4. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence 

intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

28 Supplementary Figure S2. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration under default settings for the RNG 

topology path. Panels A-C report paired QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T . Panel D reports dataset-

level median runtime deltas against dataset size, where each numbered dot is the median matched-seed value 

of FloatSOM time - XPySOM time ; negative values favor FloatSOM and positive values favor XPySOM. 

The point numbers map to Supplementary Table S5. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence 

intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

29 Supplementary Figure S3. FloatSOM versus XPySOM calibration under default settings for the hexagonal 

topology path. Panels A-C report paired QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T . Panel D reports dataset-

level median runtime deltas against dataset size, where each numbered dot is the median matched-seed value 

of FloatSOM time - XPySOM time ; negative values favor FloatSOM and positive values favor XPySOM. 

The point numbers map to Supplementary Table S6. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence 

intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

30 Supplementary Figure S4: MST vs RNG Across QE Metrics 

> blobs
> circles
> moons
> s_curve
> swiss_roll
> breast_cancer
> wine
> iris
> digits
> olivetti_faces
> diabetes
> california_housing
> covertype
> kddcup99
> GLOBAL_OVERALL

A Balanced QE B Holdout QE C Train QE   

> QE change (%)
> ←Favours RNG | Favours MST →

Supplementary Figure S4. MST versus RNG topology on QE metrics under full sampling only. Panels A-C 

report paired full sampling only QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T across the available full sampling 

datasets. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. Supplementary Figure S5: Hexagonal vs MST Sensitivity Across QE Metrics 

> Δ QE Mean (%)

D Balanced QE E Holdout QE F Train QE 

Top-k Trials Used per Paired Unit   

> ←Favours MST | Favours Hexagonal →

Supplementary Figure S5. Hexagonal versus MST topology sensitivity under full sampling only. Panels A-C 

report the matched top-k paired sensitivity analysis for QE B , QE H , and QE T .

31 Supplementary Figure S6: Hexagonal vs RNG Sensitivity Across QE Metrics 

> Δ QE Mean (%)

D Balanced QE E Holdout QE F Train QE   

> Top-k Trials Used per Paired Unit
> ←Favours RNG | Favours Hexagonal →

Supplementary Figure S6. Hexagonal versus RNG topology sensitivity under full sampling only. Panels A-C 

report the matched top-k paired sensitivity analysis for QE B , QE H , and QE T .Supplementary Figure S7: MST vs RNG Sensitivity Across QE Metrics 

> Δ QE Mean (%)

D Balanced QE E Holdout QE F Train QE   

> Top-k Trials Used per Paired Unit
> ←Favours RNG | Favours MST →

Supplementary Figure S7. MST versus RNG topology sensitivity under full sampling only. Panels A-C 

report the matched top-k paired sensitivity analysis for QE B , QE H , and QE T .

32 Supplementary Figure S8: Tuned vs True Default Across QE Metrics (Hexagonal) blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BQE Holdout CQE Train QE change (%) ← Favours True Default | Favours Tuned → Supplementary Figure S8. Tuned configuration versus untuned reference QE comparison for the hexagonal 

topology only, across QE B , QE H , and QE T under the matched pairing keys. Positive values indicate the 

tuned configuration outperforms the untuned reference. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence 

intervals around the mean paired e "ect. Supplementary Figure S9: Tuned vs True Default Across QE Metrics (MST) blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BQE Holdout CQE Train QE change (%) ← Favours True Default | Favours Tuned → 

Supplementary Figure S9. Tuned configuration versus untuned reference QE comparison for the MST 

topology only, across QE B , QE H , and QE T under the matched pairing keys. The tuned configuration 

is derived from the Optuna-selected settings by taking the mean of numeric parameters and the mode of 

categorical parameters across seeds. Positive values indicate the tuned configuration outperforms the untuned 

reference. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. 

33 Supplementary Figure S10: Tuned vs True Default Across QE Metrics (RNG) blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BQE Holdout CQE Train QE change (%) ← Favours True Default | Favours Tuned → Supplementary Figure S10. Tuned configuration versus untuned reference QE comparison for the RNG 

topology only, across QE B , QE H , and QE T under the matched pairing keys. The tuned configuration 

is derived from the Optuna-selected settings by taking the mean of numeric parameters and the mode of 

categorical parameters across seeds. Positive values indicate the tuned configuration outperforms the untuned 

reference. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. Supplementary Figure S11: Per-Topology GPU Scaling Performance (MST and Hexagonal) AMST: Dimension Scaling BMST: Sample Scaling CMST: Grid-Size Scaling DHexagonal: Dimension Scaling EHexagonal: Sample Scaling FHexagonal: Grid-Size Scaling 

Supplementary Figure S11. Full GPU-count scaling context for MST and hexagonal under matched full 

sampling settings. Panels A-C show MST runtime across dimension, sample, and grid size scaling workloads; 

panels D-F show the corresponding hexagonal runs. Within each panel, curves correspond to G ↘ {1, 2, 4, 8}

GPUs and report mean wall-clock runtime (s) with ±1 standard-deviation error bars across n = 3 repeated 

runs per configuration. 

34 Supplementary Figure S12: XPySOM (Default) v FloatSOM Hexagonal blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE % Change (positive means tuned FloatSOM Hexagonal is better) ← Favours XPySOM Default | Favours Tuned FloatSOM Hexagonal → Supplementary Figure S12. Deployment comparison of default hexagonal XPySOM versus tuned Float-

SOM hexagonal. Panels A-C report paired QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T under the matched 

dataset/seed comparison keys. Positive values indicate tuned FloatSOM hexagonal outperforms default 

hexagonal XPySOM. Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired 

e"ect. Per-dataset and GLOBAL_OVERALL panel summaries are listed in Supplementary Table S9. Supplementary Figure S13: XPySOM (Default) v FloatSOM MST blobs circles moons s_curve swiss_roll breast_cancer wine iris digits olivetti_faces diabetes california_housing covertype kddcup99 GLOBAL_OVERALL ABalanced QE BHoldout QE CTrain QE QE % Change (positive means tuned FloatSOM MST is better) ← Favours XPySOM Default | Favours Tuned FloatSOM MST → 

Supplementary Figure S13. Deployment comparison of default hexagonal XPySOM versus tuned FloatSOM 

MST. Panels A-C report paired QE e"ects for QE B , QE H , and QE T under the matched dataset/seed 

comparison keys. Positive values indicate tuned FloatSOM MST outperforms default hexagonal XPySOM. 

Forest whiskers denote 95% paired t-test confidence intervals around the mean paired e "ect. Per-dataset 

and GLOBAL_OVERALL panel summaries are listed in Supplementary Table S10. 

35