Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries: Dynamically Calibrating
Differentially Private Noise to Explainability in Federated
Learning
Michael Khavkin
School of Industrial & Intelligent
Systems Engineering, Tel Aviv
University
Kichang Lee
School of Integrated Technology,
Yonsei University
Jaeho Jin
School of Integrated Technology,
Yonsei University
JeongGil Ko
School of Integrated Technology,
Yonsei University
Eran Toch
School of Industrial & Intelligent
Systems Engineering, Tel Aviv
University
Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) with Differential Privacy (DP) is increas-
ingly adopted to preserve data confidentiality in distributed ma-
chine learning. However, DP noise distorts learned representations
and degrades explanation fidelity, limiting differentially private
FL where trustworthy explanations are required, such as assistive
clinical diagnosis. Prior work adapted DP noise with static feature-
importance signals, restricting explainability to post hoc analysis
and precluding noise calibration to explanation quality during train-
ing. We propose XCal-FL, a closed-loop, explainability-driven local
training algorithm for image classification in cross-silo FL that
dynamically calibrates DP noise from three complementary sig-
nals: (1) prediction logit variations, measuring causal influence on
model confidence, (2) counterfactual margins, capturing decision-
boundary sensitivity, and (3) saliency concentration, quantifying
spatial coherence of model attention, while enforcing formal DP
guarantees via adaptive privacy accounting. Experiments on three
medical imaging datasets across varying FL configurations show
that XCal-FL yields more accurate and interpretable global models,
improving predictive performance by over 10% and explanation
fidelity by up to 5× over static-noise FL, and outperforming state-
of-the-art adaptive DP methods in fidelity. XCal-FL also achieves
higher privacy-budget efficiency, turning each unit of cumulative
privacy loss into larger gains in both accuracy and explanation
fidelity. Our analysis further reveals that, unlike predictive perfor-
mance, which scales roughly linearly with privacy loss, explanation
fidelity exhibits non-linear dynamics. These findings suggest ex-
plainability is a distinct dimension of the privacy trade-off that
cannot be inferred from utility alone, with implications for training
and privacy-budget allocation in decision-critical applications.
Keywords
Federated Learning, Explainable AI, Differential Privacy, Privacy-
Utility Tradeoff, Explanation Fidelity, Medical Imaging
1
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly deployed in do-
mains that require learning from distributed and sensitive data,
motivating the adoption of privacy-preserving training paradigms,
most notably Federated Learning (FL) [33]. FL enables collabora-
tive model training across multiple parties without centralizing
raw data, helping organizations comply with privacy regulations
such as GDPR [9] and HIPAA [43]. Particularly, in healthcare ap-
plications, ML models for processing medical images provide rich
diagnostic information that supports early disease detection and
personalized treatment planning, while reducing the burden on
clinicians through automated analysis [5, 29].
Despite its privacy advantages, FL alone does not fully prevent
information leakage, as shared model updates can still be exploited
through inference and reconstruction attacks [18, 53]. To address
this risk, Differential Privacy (DP) [13] has emerged as the gold
standard for privacy protection in FL [49], typically implemented
via gradient perturbation mechanisms such as DP-SGD [1]. DP pro-
vides formal guarantees against information leakage by bounding
the sensitive information that can be inferred about the input data
or its subjects from model outputs and measured by the privacy
loss budget 𝜀. However, injecting DP noise during FL training intro-
duces trade-offs that extend beyond the privacy-utility trade-off [3].
In particular, stochastic noise can distort learned representations,
weakening the relationship between input features and model pre-
dictions and degrading the fidelity of model explanations, which
are critical for understanding why a model produced a given output.
Moreover, while predictive performance degrades approximately
monotonically with increasing noise, the relationship between DP
and explanation fidelity is less understood, suggesting that explain-
ability may require dedicated treatment beyond standard privacy-
utility analysis. This is because gradient-based attributions depend
on the fine-grained spatial coherence of the learned gradient field,
a quantity that is more sensitive to the directional corruption intro-
duced by DP-SGD [10] than the coarse class-level output on which
predictive accuracy relies [48]. This creates a tension between pri-
vacy and explainability, limiting the applicability of differentially
private FL in settings where transparent and trustworthy explana-
tions are required. For example, in multi-hospital collaborations
for radiological decision-support systems, a model that achieves
1
arXiv:2609.03851v1  [cs.LG]  3 Sep 2026


high sensitivity but provides unreliable explanations may fail in-
stitutional review requirements or undermine clinician confidence
in automated findings, limiting real-world adoption regardless of
predictive accuracy.
Current differentially private FL methods apply uniform noise to
all gradient features. This leads to two complementary problems: im-
portant features that carry discriminative signal are over-perturbed,
degrading both predictive accuracy and explanation fidelity, while
less informative features receive more noise than necessary, wast-
ing privacy budget without meaningful protection gain. Alternative
approaches adjust noise using feature-importance signals [30], but
rely on a fixed noise magnitude that does not adapt to training
dynamics. Moreover, recent empirical studies provide growing evi-
dence of a privacy-explainability trade-off under DP [40]. In both
cases, noise is applied in an open-loop fashion: it does not condition
on whether the model’s current attributions are actually faithful
to its predictions. As a result, noise calibration cannot respond to
shifts in explanation quality during training, and the joint trade-offs
among privacy, predictive performance, and explainability remain
insufficiently explored in FL. This gap is further underscored by re-
cent surveys highlighting the lack of evaluation methodologies for
explainability under DP [32]. This leads to an important question:
(RQ1) Can explainability-aware noise calibration during FL
training improve both predictive performance and explana-
tion fidelity while preserving formal DP guarantees?
Beyond the established privacy-utility paradigm, recent work
demonstrates that multiple model objectives interact non-trivially
under DP [20]. For example, techniques designed to improve pre-
dictive performance under strict privacy budgets can inadvertently
amplify model bias, revealing a complex tension between privacy,
utility, and fairness [22]. Yet, while static evaluations confirm that
DP noise inherently degrades explanation fidelity [15, 40], the dy-
namics of this degradation and how explanation quality evolves
as training progresses remain unexplored. This leads to two addi-
tional open questions. First, (RQ2) can adaptive DP noise cali-
bration translate cumulative privacy loss into larger gains
in accuracy and explanation fidelity than static noise allo-
cation? Second, if so, (RQ3) does explainability follow the
same trajectory as predictive performance under cumulative
privacy loss, or does it constitute a fundamentally different
dimension of the privacy-utility trade-off? Beyond improving
accuracy and explanation fidelity as isolated metrics, understand-
ing how explanation quality evolves during training has a direct
operational consequence: if explainability peaks earlier than pre-
dictive performance under cumulative privacy loss, practitioners
can terminate training at the point of maximum explanation gain
rather than waiting for performance to plateau, thereby utilizing
less cumulative privacy loss budget. This makes the dynamics of
explainability under DP a practically actionable quantity, rather
than being merely a post-hoc diagnostic.
In this work, we address the aforementioned questions by inte-
grating privacy-aware explainability into the local training process
of clients in FL. Following prior work that improves FL by adapting
training dynamics [26, 31], we propose XCal-FL, an explainability-
driven FL framework for cross-silo FL environments that dynam-
ically calibrates the magnitude of DP noise during local training
using a composite signal. Specifically, our approach dynamically
regulates noise injection during training by monitoring three sig-
nals: (1) class logit variations induced by salient-region masking
(capturing the causal influence of highlighted regions on the pre-
diction); (2) counterfactual margins (capturing decision-boundary
sensitivity to the removal of explanatory evidence); and (3) in-
fluential region concentration (capturing the spatial coherence of
the model’s attention). By integrating explainability and decision-
related feedback directly into training in a closed-loop manner,
XCal-FL reduces unnecessary perturbation of informative model
representations while fully preserving DP guarantees, as the cumu-
lative privacy cost of the adaptively scaled noise is tracked at every
training step to enforce the target (𝜀, 𝛿)-DP budget.
We evaluated our approach on three medical imaging tasks,
covering blood cell type classification, pneumonia detection from
X-ray scans and melanoma detection from dermatologic scans. Ex-
periments span varying cross-silo FL configurations with different
numbers of clients (𝑁= 3, 10, 50) and data heterogeneity conditions,
measuring both predictive performance and explanation fidelity
using the Remove and Debias (ROAD) metric [38]. Across datasets
and privacy budgets, XCal-FL consistently improved both predic-
tive performance and explanation fidelity over static DP-FL and
the state-of-the-art adaptive method AGP [30], while achieving
higher privacy–utility and privacy–explainability efficiency, i.e.,
translating cumulative privacy loss into larger gains in accuracy
and explanation fidelity. Importantly, our empirical analysis reveals
an asymmetry: while predictive performance scales approximately
linearly with cumulative privacy expenditure, explanation fidelity
exhibits non-linear dynamics. This suggests that standard privacy-
utility analyses are insufficient to capture the full impact of DP on
model behavior, and that explainability requires dedicated evalua-
tion and optimization as a distinct dimension of the privacy-utility
trade-off.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Closed-loop noise calibration: We proposed XCal-FL,
a cross-silo FL training approach that dynamically cali-
brates DP noise magnitude based on explainability- and
decision-related signals, while preserving formal (𝜀,𝛿)-DP
guarantees through adaptive privacy accounting.
• Empirical evaluation on medical imaging: Across three
medical image classification datasets and varying FL con-
figurations, XCal-FL improves F1-score by over 10% and
ROAD explanation fidelity by up to 5× over static DP-FL,
while outperforming AGP [30] by over 10% in F1-score and
over 75% in explanation fidelity, on average.
• Privacy-budget efficiency analysis: We proposed a quan-
titative evaluation of privacy-budget efficiency, defined as
the gain in F1-score or ROAD per unit of cumulative pri-
vacy loss. XCal-FL improves privacy-utility efficiency by up
to 25% and privacy-explainability efficiency by threefold
over training with static DP noise.
• Privacy-explainability dynamics: Our empirical analy-
sis reveals that, while predictive performance scales approx-
imately linearly with cumulative privacy loss, explanation
fidelity exhibits non-linear dynamics, with ROAD scores
potentially increasing early in training before the privacy
budget is fully consumed.
2


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
Taken together, these contributions advance the practical viabil-
ity of differentially private FL for safety-critical clinical decision-
support applications, where regulatory and institutional require-
ments increasingly demand that automated diagnostic outputs be
accompanied by faithful and interpretable justifications.
2
Related Work
Recent work demonstrates that DP interacts non-trivially with
model properties beyond utility: DP-driven generalization can am-
plify bias [22], post hoc privacy analysis can reclaim budget without
sacrificing formal guarantees [20], and alternative federated opti-
mization formulations leverage synthetic samples alongside gradi-
ents to improve privacy-utility trade-offs [44]. However, DP noise
systematically degrades prediction performance and explanation
fidelity [15, 40], with gradient-based attributions [41] proving par-
ticularly sensitive to perturbations [52]. Prior DP-FL applications
in healthcare rely on post hoc explainability [2, 7, 25] or static noise
schedules [11]. Moreover, recent surveys highlight the lack of con-
sistent evaluation frameworks for explainability under DP-FL [32].
These findings motivate training-time approaches that explicitly
account for explainability, rather than relying on post hoc analysis.
As summarized in Table 1, existing adaptive DP-FL methods
adjust clipping bounds, noise scales, or budget allocations, but
typically do not integrate explainability during training. For in-
stance, standard adaptive clipping methods [4] dynamically tune
the clipping threshold 𝐶using privatized quantiles of client update
norm distributions. However, they focus strictly on update-scale
optimization and remain entirely agnostic to model explainability.
Among explainability-aware approaches, the most closely related
is Adaptive Gradient Protection (AGP) [30], an open-loop method
that uses Grad-CAM channel importance weights to decide where
noise lands spatially via binary channel masking while keeping per-
round noise magnitude fixed. In contrast, XCal-FL is a closed-loop
method that dynamically regulates how much noise (via the noise
multiplier 𝜎) to inject at each step based on a composite signal that
(i) causally tests whether the saliency map is decision-relevant via
logit drop under masking, (ii) measures decision-boundary geom-
etry via counterfactual margin, and (iii) tracks spatial attention
coherence. Thus, because AGP controls spatial noise distribution
while XCal-FL dynamically scales temporal noise magnitude, the
two strategies operate on orthogonal axes and are complementary.
Furthermore, XCal-FL’s closed-loop formulation enables analyzing
how cumulative privacy budget translates into joint gains in accu-
racy and explanation fidelity, a dimension underexplored in prior
work.
3
Background
3.1
Differentially Private Federated Learning
Federated Learning (FL) [33] is a distributed learning paradigm
in which multiple clients, such as hospitals or banks, collabora-
tively train a shared model while keeping raw data decentralized.
Formally, at communication round 𝑡, each participating client 𝑖
initializes its local model parameters w𝑖with the global parameters
w(𝑡). The client minimizes a local loss function L using stochastic
gradient descent. For a given mini-batch (𝑥𝑘,𝑦𝑘)𝐵
𝑘=1, the per-sample
gradient is computed with respect to the current local model as:
𝑔𝑘= ∇w𝑖L(w𝑖;𝑥𝑘,𝑦𝑘).
(1)
In standard (non-private) FL, the batch gradient 𝑔is simply the
average of these per-sample gradients, and the parameters are
updated iteratively over 𝐸local epochs according to w𝑖←w𝑖−
𝜂𝑔, where 𝜂denotes the learning rate. After completing its local
training steps, the resulting parameters form client 𝑖’s updated
model, denoted as w(𝑡+1)
𝑖
. The server then aggregates these models
to form the new global model:
w(𝑡+1) =
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑛𝑖
Í𝑁
𝑗=1 𝑛𝑗
w(𝑡+1)
𝑖
,
(2)
where 𝑁is the number of participating clients and 𝑛𝑖is the local
dataset size of client 𝑖.
To provide formal privacy guarantees, FL is commonly combined
with Differential Privacy (DP), which bounds the information that
can be inferred about any single individual from the training pro-
cess. A randomized mechanism M is (𝜀,𝛿)-differentially private if,
for any neighboring datasets 𝐷and 𝐷′ differing in one record, and
for any output set S,
Pr[M(𝐷) ∈S] ≤𝑒𝜀Pr[M(𝐷′) ∈S] + 𝛿,
(3)
where 𝜀controls the privacy loss budget and 𝛿denotes the probabil-
ity that this guarantee may not hold. DP can be enforced at different
points in the FL pipeline, often yielding different levels of privacy
granularity. Server-side approaches such as DP-FedAvg [34] pro-
vide user-level privacy by clipping individual client updates and
adding noise to their aggregation on the server. While this protects
against external observers, it requires trust in the server itself to
handle raw client updates securely. Differentially Private client-
side DP-SGD [1] instead enforces record-level privacy locally: each
client clips the per-sample gradients to a fixed norm 𝐶and adds
calibrated Gaussian noise during local training. Specifically, instead
of using the raw per-sample gradient 𝑔𝑘, the gradient is clipped as:
¯𝑔𝑘=
𝑔𝑘
max (1, ∥𝑔𝑘∥2/𝐶) ,
(4)
and the noisy aggregated gradient for the batch is computed as:
˜𝑔= 1
𝐵
 𝐵
∑︁
𝑘=1
¯𝑔𝑘+ N (0, 𝜎2𝐶2I)
!
,
(5)
The local parameter update step is then performed using this private
gradient: w𝑖←w𝑖−𝜂˜𝑔. Here, the noise multiplier 𝜎is calibrated
such that the cumulative privacy loss across all local training steps
satisfies a target (𝜀,𝛿) privacy budget. Client-side DP-SGD provides
a stronger trust model than standard server-side approaches, as
the resulting model updates w(𝑡+1)
𝑖
are differentially private before
they ever leave the client device, protecting each client’s individual
records even against a curious server. A summary of our notations
is given in Table 2.
3.2
Model Explainability
Grad-CAM [41] is a widely used local attribution method that high-
lights image regions most influential to a model’s prediction, with
explanation quality commonly assessed by the confidence drop
when these regions are masked. The Remove And Debias (ROAD)
3


Table 1: Comparison between adaptive DP-FL methods. Adapted quantity: clipping bound 𝐶, noise magnitude 𝜎, budget
allocation 𝜀( adapted, G# placement only, # fixed). Feedback: closed = conditioned on a measured model response; open = fixed
schedule or one-shot read of model state. †Signal privatized and charged to the budget.
Adapted Quantity
Adapted At
Method
𝐶
𝜎
𝜀
Adaptation Signal
Feedback
Side
Freq.
DP Granularity
Expl.-Aware
Adaptive clipping [4]
 
#
#
Private quantile of update norms†
Closed
Server
Round
User-level
No
Adap DP-FL [17]
 
 
#
Grad-norm heterogeneity + round index
Open
Client
Round
Record-level
No
Budget alloc. [21]
#
#
 
Mechanism output
Post hoc
—
—
—
No
AGP [30]
#
G
#
#
Grad-CAM channel importance
Open
Client
Round
Record-level
Yes
XCal-FL (ours)
#
 
#
Composite Grad-CAM signal†
Closed
Client
Batch
Record-level
Yes
framework [38] extends this idea into a systematic evaluation of
explanation fidelity, i.e., how accurately a saliency map reflects the
model’s true decision process. The ROAD score serves as a proxy
for model explainability because it provides a computationally ef-
ficient and consistent evaluation of saliency-based explanations,
such as those provided by Grad-CAMs. ROAD evaluates explana-
tion fidelity by progressively removing either the most (MoRF) or
least (LeRF) relevant pixels first, imputing them with local averages,
and measuring the resulting change in the model’s output. Hence,
larger performance changes indicate higher explanation fidelity,
which is an indication for a higher model explainability.
Formally, let 𝑓(𝑥) denote the model’s confidence for input image
𝑥, and let 𝑥(𝑘)
𝑠
denote the input obtained by perturbing the top 𝑘%
most (𝑀𝑜𝑅𝐹scheme) and least (𝐿𝑒𝑅𝐹scheme) salient pixels. For
each removal level 𝑘, consider the absolute confidence difference
for either the MoRF or the LeRF scheme 𝑠as
Δ𝑠(𝑘) = 𝑓

𝑥(𝑘)
𝑠

−𝑓(𝑥),
(6)
where Δ𝑀𝑜𝑅𝐹(𝑘) corresponds to the model’s confidence change af-
ter removing the most salient features and Δ𝐿𝑒𝑅𝐹(𝑘) to the change
after removing the least salient ones. We follow an approach that
progressively removes features across multiple thresholds and aver-
ages the resulting confidence changes to produce a single combined
ROAD score [19], as follows:
ROAD =
1
2|𝐾|
∑︁
𝑘∈𝐾
 ΔLeRF(𝑘) −ΔMoRF(𝑘),
(7)
where the set 𝐾consists of thresholds corresponding to the top
20%, 40%, 60%, or 80% relevant pixels.
3.3
Threat Model
3.3.1
Entity Assumptions. We consider a cross-silo FL deploy-
ment executed over 𝑇communication rounds by two types of par-
ticipants:
• Clients 𝑖∈{1, . . . , 𝑁}, i.e., institutions such as hospitals,
each holding a private dataset D𝑖of medical images and
labels in which a single patient may contribute several im-
ages. Clients have sufficient compute for local training and
follow the protocol faithfully. Each client observes only its
own data and local model, together with the global mod-
els it receives. The attribution maps and the explainability
signal derived from them (Section 4) are computed and
consumed locally and are never transmitted.
• Aggregation server, which broadcasts w𝑡−1, collects the
locally trained parameters w𝑡
𝑖and aggregates them (Eq. 2).
It holds no training data and never observes raw samples,
per-sample gradients or attribution maps.
3.3.2
Communication channels. Clients communicate exclu-
sively with the server and never with each other, so no client ob-
serves another client’s individual update. All client-server links
are assumed to be confidential, integrity protected and mutually
authenticated (e.g., TLS with client certificates), as is common in
cross-silo federations governed by institutional agreements. An
outside observer can therefore neither read nor modify updates in
transit, nor impersonate a participant, and its knowledge is limited
to the released global model. We assume no secure aggregation
primitive, because our guarantee is enforced locally before any
parameter leaves the client.
3.3.3
Adversary model. The primary adversary is an honest-
but-curious server that follows the protocol but attempts to infer
information about individual training records from the messages it
legitimately receives. It is the strongest passive adversary in our
setting, since it observes each client’s update w𝑡
𝑖before aggregation
and accumulates these observations across rounds. Its concrete
capability is gradient-based reconstruction [18, 53], which exploits
model updates to recover individual training samples such as chest
X-ray scans, exposing patient-identifiable diagnostic information.
An honest-but-curious client, or any party obtaining the released
model, sees only aggregated parameters and is therefore strictly
weaker, so by the post-processing property of DP [14] the guarantee
established against the server covers it as well.
The unit of protection is a single training record, i.e., neigh-
boring datasets D𝑖and D′
𝑖differ in one record, yielding a record-
level (𝜀,𝛿)-DP guarantee. Clients’ defense against reconstruction
attempts is client-side DP-SGD, which clips per-sample gradients
and injects calibrated Gaussian noise before any parameter leaves
the client, with cumulative loss tracked by RDP accounting [46]. Be-
cause our method varies the noise multiplier 𝜎across mini-batches
(Section 4), two properties bound what the variation itself reveals.
First, the multiplier never falls below the value that standard, non-
adaptive DP-SGD would require for the share of the budget allo-
cated to gradient perturbation, for any input including adversarial
or out-of-distribution ones, since the signal driving it is bounded
by clipping. Second, the multiplier is a deterministic function of
a privatized signal and of public constants, so any inference the
4


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
server draws from the noise scale is bounded by the budget share
we reserve for releasing that signal, keeping the total within the
target (𝜀,𝛿) guarantee (Section 4.3 and Appendix B).
3.3.4
Limitations. Under stronger adversaries, an active server
that deviates from the protocol, for instance by sending crafted
models to isolate a target client, can degrade utility and the correct-
ness of aggregation, but not the record-level DP guarantee, which
holds per release for any input model and composes adaptively [47].
Malicious clients can corrupt the global model through poisoning,
for which robust aggregation is a complementary defense, and a
client that inflates its explainability score through crafted inputs
can at most lower its noise multiplier to the lower end of the per-
mitted range, which leaves the target guarantee intact and does
not affect other clients. Collusion, whether among clients or with
the server, adds nothing beyond what the server already observes.
Finally, the privacy guarantee of our method is record-level, so a
patient contributing several images is covered only through group
privacy, whose 𝜀degrades linearly in the number of contributed
records [14].
4
XCal-FL: Explainability-driven FL Training
with Differentially Private Noise Calibration
Current research gaps highlight the need for a FL approach that
not only enhances the explainability of model predictions, but also
improves how efficiently incurred privacy loss is translated into
gains in both performance and explainability. Hence, we propose
a training methodology designed to balance these factors while
remaining broadly applicable across diverse imaging tasks. Our
implementation code is available at https://osf.io/xr9nt/overview?
view_only=b0fd7b2b88a94578abd06dacb5d19fad.
4.1
Main Idea
We extend the standard FL training (see server-side Algorithm 2 in
Appendix A) with an explainability-driven client training procedure
(Algorithm 1) that improves the faithfulness of model explanations
while preserving predictive performance and providing DP (Fig-
ure 1). The key idea is to adapt the amount of DP noise injected into
each mini-batch update based on an explainability signal reflected
by the model’s predictions. This signal integrates three complemen-
tary components, summarized below:
❶Logit change (Δℓ). measures the decrease in the predicted-class
logit after masking the top-𝑞region of the Grad-CAM heatmap,
defined as:
Δℓ= max 0, ℓˆ𝑦(𝑥) −ℓˆ𝑦(𝑥(𝑞)),
(8)
where 𝑥(𝑞) denotes the input masked by the top-𝑞saliency region
and ˆ𝑦is the highest-scoring predicted class. A large logit drop indi-
cates that the masked region is highly influential for the prediction,
reflecting stronger explanation faithfulness.
❷Counterfactual margin (𝑚cf). quantifies the difference between
the highest counterfactual class logit and the masked predicted-
class logit:
𝑚cf = max 0, ℓˆ𝑦cf (𝑥(𝑞)) −ℓˆ𝑦(𝑥(𝑞)),
(9)
where ˆ𝑦cf is the highest-scoring counterfactual class. A larger mar-
gin indicates that the salient region plays a critical role in separating
the true class from competing classes, encouraging the model to
form sharper and more semantically meaningful decision bound-
aries.
❸Saliency concentration (𝑐). measures the fraction of the total
saliency sum contained within the top-𝑞region, defined as
𝑐=
Í
𝑢𝑆𝑢𝑀(𝑞)
𝑢
Í
𝑢𝑆𝑢
,
(10)
where 𝑆𝑢denotes the saliency value at spatial location𝑢and 𝑀(𝑞)
𝑢
∈
{0, 1} is the binary mask induced by retaining the top-𝑞fraction of
pixels ranked by saliency (averaged over the mini-batch). Higher
concentration indicates that the model’s attention is spatially fo-
cused rather than diffuse, yielding more localized and interpretable
explanations.
We combine the three components into a composite score
𝑠= (𝛼Δℓ+ 𝛽𝑚cf)𝑐𝛾,
(11)
where 𝛼and 𝛽weight the decision-level terms Δℓand 𝑚cf, and 𝛾
scales the influence of the saliency concentration 𝑐.
Each component captures a distinct and complementary aspect
of explanation quality: Δℓmeasures causal influence (whether the
salient region affects the prediction), 𝑚cf measures class discrimina-
tiveness (whether masking the salient region shifts the decision to-
ward a competing class), and 𝑐measures spatial specificity (whether
saliency is concentrated rather than diffuse). Importantly, no single
component is sufficient on its own. For example, a high Δℓwith
low saliency concentration 𝑐indicates that the prediction depends
on a broad, unstructured set of features rather than on a compact,
interpretable region. Reducing noise in this case would reinforce
diffuse attention patterns. Similarly, a high saliency concentration 𝑐
with low Δℓmeans that the model attends to a focused but causally
irrelevant region, producing a misleading explanation. The multi-
plicative role of 𝑐𝛾in Eq. (11) ensures that noise is reduced only
when causal influence and class discriminativeness are supported
by spatially coherent saliency, preventing the reinforcement of any
single favorable indicator in isolation. We note that the explain-
ability signal 𝑠is not part of the training objective: the model is
trained using the standard cross-entropy loss, and no gradient flows
through 𝑠back to the model parameters. This prevents the risks of
over-optimization, because the signal 𝑠only modulates the noise
level applied to the gradient, meaning the model cannot directly
optimize for a higher score, without improving its reasoning.
4.2
XCal-FL Training Procedure
Our training procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1. To satisfy the
overall target (𝜀,𝛿)-DP guarantee, the total privacy budget is parti-
tioned into two components: a fixed fraction 𝜌is allocated to the
explainability signal mechanism, 𝜀𝑠= 𝜌𝜀, from which the signal
noise scale 𝜎𝑠is calibrated across all training steps, and the remain-
der is allocated to the gradient perturbations, 𝜀𝑔= (1 −𝜌) 𝜀(line 3).
Given 𝜀𝑔and a failure probability 𝛿𝑔, we compute a reference noise
multiplier 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓via the RDP accountant as the exact value required
to achieve (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔)-DP under standard DP-SGD with a constant mul-
tiplier over all training steps. To allow dynamic noise scaling in
both directions around this reference, we define a symmetric noise
band [𝜎𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥] = [(1−𝑏)𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓, (1+𝑏)𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓], where 0 ≤𝑏≤1 (line
5


Build Grad-
CAMs
Explainability Controller
Compute explainability signal s and adjust the level of DP noise 𝝈 
s = (𝛼 · ∆𝑙+𝛽∙𝑚𝑐𝑓)c𝛾
∇w = ∇w + 𝑁(0, 𝜎2)
𝑤𝑖= 𝑤𝑖−𝜂∇w
Perform the DP-SGD step with 
updated noise level
Continue training in the next round
Perform DP accounting 𝜀𝑐𝑢𝑚
Client local model
m𝒄𝒇= 𝟓. 𝟔−𝟒. 𝟖= 𝟎. 𝟖
3.4 
5.6 
9.3 
4.8
3.0 
2.9 
1.7 
1.6 
Counterfactual class 
margin m𝒄𝒇
Before masking (logit 
NEUTROPHIL): 9.3
After masking (logit 
NEUTROPHIL): 4.8
∆𝒍= 𝟒. 𝟓
Logit change ∆𝒍 
Saliency 
concentration 𝒄
𝒄= 𝛴Stop−20%
𝛴S
= 𝟎. 𝟒𝟗
𝛴S = 4.7
𝛴Stop−20% = 2.3
Round 1
Round T
Round 2
Figure 1: Overview of FL client’s training procedure. The adaptive training process repeats for 𝑇iterations for each client.
4). Each mini-batch update begins by estimating an explanation
map using Grad-CAM to identify the regions that most strongly
influence the model’s current prediction (lines 5–11). Concretely,
given a Grad-CAM heatmap, we threshold the CAM at the 𝑘-th
largest value and select all pixels with saliency at least this cut-
off, with 𝑘= ⌈𝑞𝐻𝑊⌉, where 𝐻×𝑊denotes the CAM resolution.
Saliency concentration then measures what fraction of the total
saliency contained within this selected region, indicating whether
the model’s attention is tightly focused or diffused.
Table 2: Main hyper-parameters and notations
Notation
Description
Values
𝑁
Number of FL clients
3, 10, 50
𝐵
Mini-batch size
32
𝑇
Number of training rounds
30
𝜂
Learning rate
10−3
𝐶
Gradient clipping norm
1.0
wt
Global model weights at iteration 𝑡
wt
i
Client’s 𝑖model weights at iteration 𝑡
𝑏
Noise band expansion factor (0 ≤𝑏≤1)
0.2
𝜌
Fraction of 𝜀allocated to composite signal
0.1
𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓
Reference DP noise multiplier
𝜎𝑚𝑖𝑛
Lower band limit
𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥
Upper band limit
𝜎𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝
DP noise multiplier at a batch step
𝛿
DP failure probability
10−5
𝑞
Fraction of most salient pixels to mask
0.2
𝜏
Smoothing coefficient
0.2
Δℓ
Logit change
𝑚𝑐𝑓
Counterfactual margin
𝑐
Saliency concentration
𝛼
Weight of Logit change Δℓ
𝛽
Weight of Counterfactual margin 𝑚cf
𝛾
Weight of Saliency concentration 𝑐
Next, we evaluate how important this salient region is by per-
forming both a forward and a masked-forward pass. From these
runs, we compute three explainability indicators: (i) prediction logit
change (line 9), (ii) counterfactual class margin (line 10), and (iii)
saliency concentration (line 11). Together, these components quan-
tify how much the model depends on meaningful, well-localized fea-
tures. These three indicators are combined into a unified weighted
explainability score 𝑠raw (lines 12–13). Because this raw score is
derived directly from the private mini-batch, it must be privatized
before it can be used to modulate the training process. We explic-
itly bound its sensitivity to 1 via clipping and apply the Gaussian
mechanism by adding noise scaled by a constant 𝜎𝑠to obtain the
differentially private signal ˜𝑠raw (line 14). The privatized signal is
then smoothed to yield the final explainability score 𝑠(line 15),
which securely modulates the noise multiplier 𝜎step applied in the
model’s parameter update for the current mini-batch (line 16). Be-
fore the noisy update is applied, the candidate 𝜎𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝is projected
onto the budget-feasible portion of the band (line 17): a multiplier
𝜎is feasible if the cumulative RDP cost after one additional step
at 𝜎still converts to at most (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔). Since the per-step RDP cost
decreases monotonically in 𝜎, this projection either leaves 𝜎𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝
unchanged, raises it to the smallest feasible value, or, when even
𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥is infeasible, halts noisy updates for the remainder of training
(lines 18–19). The realized cost of the admitted step is then added
to the accountant state before the update is applied (line 21). Dur-
ing each update, we apply standard DP-SGD, where gradients are
clipped to limit the influence of any individual sample, and Gauss-
ian noise, scaled according to the clipping norm and the adaptively
chosen 𝜎step, is added before updating the client’s model parameters
(lines 22–25). This ensures that every mini-batch contributes only
a controlled and privacy-preserving amount of information to the
training process.
The cumulative privacy cost of the gradient updates is tracked
by the RDP accountant [35, 46]1 at every training step, immediately
before the noisy update is applied, and the privacy filter described
above guarantees that it never exceeds (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔). Therefore, the com-
posed cost of both mechanisms therefore adheres to the global
budget (Appendix B).
1Our implementation uses fixed-size mini-batch sampling rather than the Poisson sub-
sampling assumed by RDP accounting. This practice is widely adopted in the literature,
though the resulting privacy parameters should be interpreted as approximate [37].
6


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
Algorithm 1: XCal-Client: Explainability-driven FL
Training with Differentially Private Noise Calibration
Input: Client 𝑖training data D𝑖= {𝑋𝑖,𝑌𝑖}, w𝑡−1; Training
parameters: 𝜂, 𝐵; DP parameters: 𝐶, 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓, 𝑏, 𝛿, 𝜌;
Explainability parameters: 𝑞, 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾, 𝜏
Output: Round 𝑡client model parameters
1 Initialize local model w𝑡
𝑖←w𝑡−1;
2 Initialize explainability signal 𝑠←0;
3 Initialize RDP accountant with target budget (𝜀𝑔, 𝛿𝑔);
4 𝜎𝑚𝑖𝑛←(1 −𝑏)𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓; 𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥←(1 + 𝑏)𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓;
5 for each mini-batch (x, y) of size 𝐵sampled from D𝑖do
// Compute the explainability controls:
6
Compute model prediction ˜𝑦for x;
7
Compute Grad-CAM S for (x, ˜𝑦) under w𝑡
𝑖;
8
Construct top-𝑞mask from S;
9
Compute logit change Δℓ(before and after masking);
10
Compute counterfactual margin 𝑚cf;
11
Compute saliency concentration 𝑐;
// Compose the explainability signal:
12
𝑠raw ←(𝛼· Δℓ+ 𝛽· 𝑚cf) 𝑐𝛾;
13
𝑠raw ←Clip(𝑠raw, 0, 1);
// Privatize the explainability signal:
14
˜𝑠raw ←Clip 𝑠raw + N (0, 𝜎2
𝑠), 0, 1;
// Smooth the explainability signal:
15
𝑠←(1 −𝜏) 𝑠+ 𝜏˜𝑠raw;
// Adjust DP noise based on Xpl. signal:
16
𝜎step ←𝜎max −𝑠(𝜎max −𝜎min);
// Privacy filter:
17
𝜎step ←smallest admissible 𝜎∈[𝜎step, 𝜎max];
18
if no such 𝜎exists then
19
return (w𝑡
𝑖) ;
// Budget exhausted
20
end
// DP Accounting:
21
Charge the accountant with a step at 𝜎step;
// DP-SGD update for this mini-batch:
22
𝑔𝑘←∇wL(w𝑡
𝑖;𝑥𝑘,𝑦𝑘) for 𝑘= 1, . . . , 𝐵;
23
𝑔𝑘←
𝑔𝑘
max 1, ∥𝑔𝑘∥2/𝐶 for all 𝑘;
// Clipping to 𝐶
24
˜𝑔←1
𝐵
Í𝐵
𝑘=1 𝑔𝑘+ N (0, 𝜎2
step𝐶2I)

;
25
w𝑡
𝑖←w𝑡
𝑖−𝜂˜𝑔;
26
Update cumulative privacy loss 𝜀cum,𝑖;
27 end
28 return w(𝑡)
𝑖
4.3
Noise Calibration as Signal-Dependent
Regularization
Beyond enforcing the privacy budget, the adaptive calculation of
𝜎step (line 15 in Algorithm 1) admits a learning-theoretic interpreta-
tion: it implements a form of signal-dependent regularization on the
DP-SGD gradient update, modulating the noise term N (0, 𝜎2𝐶2I)
according to the current quality of the model’s explanations. Under
DP-SGD, the noise added to clipped gradients controls the trade-off
between privacy and learning fidelity, while inherently acting as
a regularizer against overfitting [1, 12, 36]. Our adaptive mecha-
nism draws on this insight: when 𝑠is high, the model grounds
its predictions in coherent evidence, so reducing 𝜎step preserves
informative gradient components. Conversely, when 𝑠is low, the
gradient signal is unreliable, and higher noise acts as regulariza-
tion that prevents the model from overfitting to spurious patterns.
Viewed through the privacy budget, this regularization corresponds
to a redistribution of privacy expenditure over training: steps with
high explanation quality receive less noise and consume budget
faster, while steps with low explanation quality receive more noise
and conserve budget. XCal-FL therefore spends the same total pri-
vacy budget as the static baseline, but allocates it to the training
steps where the gradient signal is most informative, dynamically
adjusting the per-step privacy cost while the total privacy loss re-
mains strictly upper-bounded by the formal (𝜀,𝛿)-DP guarantee
(Appendix B).
An important consequence of this interaction is that predic-
tive performance and explanation fidelity may respond differently
to cumulative privacy loss. While classification depends only on
producing the correct output ranking and can tolerate moderate
gradient directional corruption [10], explanation fidelity relies on
fine-grained spatial coherence, which is highly sensitive to perturba-
tions and inherently unstable [48, 51, 52]. Since DP-SGD amplifies
this stochasticity through per-step noise injection, the relation-
ship between cumulative privacy loss and explanation fidelity need
not follow the approximately linear trajectory typically observed
for predictive performance. This asymmetry has a direct practical
implication: because the gradient components most relevant to
explanation quality may converge at a different rate than those
driving predictive accuracy, a single noise schedule optimized for
one objective is unlikely to be simultaneously optimal for the other.
XCal-FL addresses this by allowing the noise multiplier to track
explanation quality dynamically, effectively decoupling the opti-
mization trajectories of the two objectives within the same privacy
budget. We examine this hypothesis empirically in Section 6.3.
5
Empirical Evaluation on Medical Imaging
We evaluated our method on public medical imaging datasets (Ta-
ble 6 in Appendix C), including blood cell classification, pneumonia
detection using chest X-rays, and melanoma detection using der-
moscopic images, providing a diverse testbed to assess the effects
of adaptive DP on performance and explainability. We used a fed-
erated learning setup to train two types of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) with different architectures: EfficientNet-B0 [42]
with 5.3𝑀parameters and ResNet-18 [23] with 11.7𝑀parameters.
We assume a cross-silo environment [50] comprising a small num-
ber of clients (e.g., organizations such as hospitals) with robust
and reliable computational resources. This assumption aligns with
practical cross-silo FL settings, particularly in the medical domain,
where clinical image data is primarily held by large organizations,
such as hospitals, rather than on edge devices. Hence, we varied
the number of clients participating in the training, with a default
of 𝑁= 3 clients, where each client stored the same amount of data
(sampled with replacement from our dataset when the dataset size
was too small for a large number of clients). To simulate a non-IID
7


Table 3: F1-score across datasets for our adaptive training (XCal-FL), compared with FL+DP (static DP noise) and AGP [30]. Each
privacy setting is defined by a target 𝜀and its corresponding adaptive noise range [𝜎min, 𝜎max]. Results are shown for a FL setting
comprised of 𝑁= 3 clients, training an EfficientNet-B0 model with a balanced XCal-FL configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1).
Dataset
No DP
𝜀= 0.05 ( 19.68 ≤𝜎≤29.52)
𝜀= 0.5 ( 2.77 ≤𝜎≤4.16)
𝜀= 5.0 ( 0.72 ≤𝜎≤1.08)
𝜀= 50.0 ( 0.23 ≤𝜎≤0.35)
Centr.
FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
Blood Cells
0.862
0.844
0.235
0.285
0.290
0.654
0.663
0.716
0.811
0.807
0.834
0.840
0.849
0.856
Chest X-rays
0.680
0.669
0.478
0.465
0.492
0.529
0.542
0.600
0.599
0.569
0.623
0.658
0.596
0.629
Melanoma
0.896
0.777
0.511
0.464
0.530
0.693
0.709
0.712
0.745
0.759
0.761
0.777
0.855
0.886
environment, we performed the data splitting among clients while
creating both a class label shift and feature shift (covariate shift).
Covariate shift was simulated by applying a linearly varying bright-
ness perturbation across clients, so that each client observes images
under systematically different illumination conditions while the
underlying label structure is preserved. We trained each model over
𝑇= 30 communication rounds (Table 2).
Models were trained under different configurations of explain-
ability components described in Section 4.2, with gradient privacy
controlled via an adaptive noise multiplier 𝜎step and an overall 𝛿
fixed to 10−5. We set the fraction of the budget dedicated to the
explainability signal to 𝜌= 0.10, meaning 𝜀𝑠= 0.10𝜀and 𝜀𝑔= 0.90𝜀.
The noise band half-width factor is set to b = 0.2 in our experiments,
yielding a symmetric band 𝜎𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝∈[0.8𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓, 1.2𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓]. We set the
saliency-based mask fraction to 𝑞= 0.2. We compare our approach
against centralized (non-FL) training, standard FL without DP and
AGP [30]. For fair comparison, we ran AGP under our FL setup
with a representative Gaussian noise scale averaged over the range
for each target 𝜀. We then fixed the fraction of important channels
to 𝑟= 0.2 to match our setting (𝑞= 0.2). For each target 𝜀, the static
FL+DP baseline uses the constant multiplier that exactly exhausts
𝜀over 𝑇rounds, so that all comparisons between XCal-FL and the
baselines are made at matched total privacy expenditure.
After training each FL model, we evaluated predictive perfor-
mance on the test set using the F1-score, alongside the cumulative
privacy loss incurred during training. The F1-score captures both
sensitivity and precision, making it well suited to medical classifi-
cation tasks that often involve imbalanced class or feature distribu-
tions. Then, we evaluated explainability under adaptive DP noise
through quantitative and qualitative analyses. Quantitatively, we
report the relative percentage change in ROAD scores on our test
set [38]. Qualitatively, we generate Grad-CAMs for each model’s
predicted class and overlay them on test images to examine how
increasing noise shifts attention from diagnostic regions to diffuse
patterns. Finally, we quantitatively evaluate the trade-off between
privacy, predictive performance and explainability.
6
Results
6.1
Privacy-Utility Trade-off
The adaptive training procedure consistently improved global FL
model performance across different DP configurations compared
to static noise training (Table 3), addressing the performance as-
pect of RQ1. For example, in blood cell type classification, adap-
tive training achieved an F1-score of 0.716 under a noise range of
2.77 ≤𝜎≤4.16 (around an 𝜀= 0.5 guarantee), compared to 0.654
with static noise. Nevertheless, both adaptive and static DP-trained
models remained less accurate than the centralized model and the
corresponding non-DP FL model, which achieved F1-scores of 0.86
and 0.84, respectively. As expected, we observed an increasing trend
in the model’s performance as the DP guarantee weakened (lower
noise multiplier 𝜎leading to higher 𝜀), i.e., for a noise setting of
0.23 ≤𝜎≤0.35, the performance of all models approached that of
their corresponding non-DP FL counterparts. Our adaptive method
consistently outperformed AGP in F1 across most datasets and pri-
vacy settings. Equally weighting all three signal components (logit
change, counterfactual margin, and saliency concentration with
𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) yielded higher utility than using any component
in isolation. An ablation study (Section 7 and Appendix E) con-
firmed that this configuration provides strong performance and
explainability across all settings.
To further assess the robustness of XCal-FL, we examined how
the number of participating clients and the degree of data hetero-
geneity affect model performance (Figure 2a). Under IID partition-
ing, both EfficientNet-B0 and ResNet-18 improved steadily as the
number of clients increased from 𝑁=3 to 𝑁=50. A similar trend
appeared under label shift, a non-IID setting in which class propor-
tions vary across clients: ResNet-18 recovered from 0.70 at 𝑁=3 to
0.86 at 𝑁=50, suggesting that aggregating updates from a larger,
more label-diverse client pool helps compensate for local class im-
balances. Covariate shift, a more severe non-IID setting in which
image features themselves differ across clients, proved consider-
ably more challenging: EfficientNet-B0 plateaued around 0.53 and
ResNet-18 around 0.67 at 𝑁=50, indicating that when clients differ
in their input distributions rather than merely in class proportions,
increasing the number of participants yields diminishing returns.
Overall, ResNet-18 benefited more from scaling the client set than
EfficientNet-B0 across all heterogeneity conditions, consistently
achieving a smaller gap to its centralized upper bound (additional
results for all datasets are provided in Appendix D).
6.2
Model Explainability
Our adaptive FL training procedure led to a larger average drop
in model confidence compared to static training, addressing the
explainability aspect of RQ1. A higher drop indicates that masking
a small set of salient regions causes a stronger reduction in pre-
dicted confidence, reflecting more causal and informative saliency.
Using the ROAD metric averaged across multiple relevance per-
centiles, we observed a steady increase over our dynamic training,
reaching final scores of 80.57%, 7.23% and 42.66% for the blood
cell type, pneumonia detection and melanoma classification tasks,
respectively (for noise multiplier 2.77 ≤𝜎≤4.16). In particular,
the blood cell model exhibited a confidence reduction of over 80%
when the most salient regions were removed, indicating a strong
8


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
Table 4: ROAD score (explanation fidelity), averaged over relevance thresholds (top 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% pixels), for global
models across datasets using XCal-FL, compared with FL+DP (static DP noise) and AGP [30]. Each privacy setting is defined by
a target 𝜀and its corresponding adaptive noise range [𝜎min, 𝜎max]. Results are shown for a FL setting comprised of 𝑁= 3 clients,
training an EfficientNet-B0 model with a balanced XCal-FL configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1).
Dataset
No DP
𝜀= 0.05 ( 19.68 ≤𝜎≤29.52)
𝜀= 0.5 ( 2.77 ≤𝜎≤4.16)
𝜀= 5.0 ( 0.72 ≤𝜎≤1.08)
𝜀= 50.0 ( 0.23 ≤𝜎≤0.35)
Centr.
FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
FL+DP
AGP
XCal-FL
Blood Cells
202.955
283.255
25.938
17.564
35.626
15.561
13.456
80.568
86.346
116.614
93.803
113.193
139.758
264.896
Chest X-rays
407.588
187.114
3.427
3.536
5.758
5.742
9.206
7.229
9.206
12.093
13.925
4.913
25.439
9.130
Melanoma
64.819
24.921
0.474
2.296
8.012
31.272
32.610
42.661
54.056
61.072
63.220
81.462
101.739
113.956
3
10
50
Number of Clients (N)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
Centralized (0.90)
EfficientNet-B0
3
10
50
Number of Clients (N)
Centralized (0.91)
ResNet-18
IID
Non-IID (Label Shift)
Non-IID (Covariate Shift)
(a) Performance (F1 score)
3
10
50
Number of Clients (N)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ROAD Score
Centralized (64.82)
EfficientNet-B0
3
10
50
Number of Clients (N)
Centralized (66.83)
ResNet-18
IID
Non-IID (Label Shift)
Non-IID (Covariate Shift)
(b) Explainability (ROAD score)
Figure 2: F1 and ROAD scores of the global models trained
on the Melanoma dataset under our adaptive DP method
(XCal-FL) as a function of the number of federated clients
under IID and non-IID data distribution settings (𝜀= 5).
causal dependence of its predictions on the identified explanatory
features. In contrast, the static training model showed much lower
sensitivity with only a 15.56%, 5.74% and 31.27% confidence drops
under the same noise setting for the blood cell type, pneumonia
detection and melanoma classification tasks, respectively. This sug-
gests that the predictions of static training models were only weakly
affected by the removal of salient evidence and thus less depen-
dent on meaningful explanatory regions. These results show that
explainability-driven training strengthens the model’s reliance on
meaningful salient regions, because perturbing these areas leads
to a larger and more systematic change in the model’s predictions.
Similarly to predictive performance, equally weighting all three
signal components (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) yielded stronger explainability
than using any component in isolation (section 7 and Appendix
E). For the Chest X-ray pneumonia task, AGP achieved a higher
average ROAD score than our method, which we attribute to its
explicit suppression of noise on highly salient channels that better
preserves gradient-based explanations in this more challenging
setting (which is trained on grayscale images).
Furthermore, we observed a clear relationship between the level
of DP noise and model explainability, measured by the ROAD metric
True: LYMPHOCYTE
Original
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
Centralized
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
FL no DP
Pred: EOSINOPHIL
FL + DP: = 0.05
Pred: EOSINOPHIL
AGP: = 0.05
Pred: NEUTROPHIL
XCal
FL: = 0.05
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
FL + DP: = 0.5
Pred: MONOCYTE
AGP: = 0.5
Pred: NEUTROPHIL
XCal
FL: = 0.5
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
FL + DP: = 5
Pred: EOSINOPHIL
AGP: = 5
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
XCal
FL: = 5
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
FL + DP: = 50
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
AGP: = 50
Pred: LYMPHOCYTE
XCal
FL: = 50
(a) Blood cell type detection (class: Lymphocyte)
True: Pneumonia
Original
Pred: Pneumonia
Centralized
Pred: Normal
FL no DP
Pred: Pneumonia
FL + DP: = 0.05
Pred: Normal
AGP: = 0.05
Pred: Normal
XCal
FL: = 0.05
Pred: Normal
FL + DP: = 0.5
Pred: Normal
AGP: = 0.5
Pred: Normal
XCal
FL: = 0.5
Pred: Pneumonia
FL + DP: = 5
Pred: Normal
AGP: = 5
Pred: Normal
XCal
FL: = 5
Pred: Normal
FL + DP: = 50
Pred: Normal
AGP: = 50
Pred: Pneumonia
XCal
FL: = 50
(b) Pneumonia detection using Chest X-Rays (class: Pneumonia)
True: malignant
Original
Pred: malignant
Centralized
Pred: malignant
FL no DP
Pred: malignant
FL + DP: = 0.05
Pred: malignant
AGP: = 0.05
Pred: malignant
XCal
FL: = 0.05
Pred: malignant
FL + DP: = 0.5
Pred: malignant
AGP: = 0.5
Pred: malignant
XCal
FL: = 0.5
Pred: malignant
FL + DP: = 5
Pred: malignant
AGP: = 5
Pred: malignant
XCal
FL: = 5
Pred: malignant
FL + DP: = 50
Pred: malignant
AGP: = 50
Pred: malignant
XCal
FL: = 50
(c) Melanoma detection using skin scans (class: Malignant)
Figure 3: Qualitative analysis of model explainability us-
ing Grad-CAM visualizations for representative test samples
across datasets and DP guarantees (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1). CAMs are
generated from the final convolutional layer of the global
FL model for the predicted class, with red regions indicating
stronger influence.
(Table 4). As the level of noise increases, gradient directions become
less stable and saliency maps less coherent, leading to lower ROAD
scores as the model’s attention becomes more dispersed across
the image. Conversely, as the DP guarantee weakens (less noise is
9


injected to the model’s gradients), saliency maps become sharper
and the ROAD metric improves. This is visually illustrated in Fig. 3,
which compares the CAMs of a single test positive image (positive
to the existence of a medical issue) in each of our evaluated datasets
across varying DP levels, compared to the two baselines. From visual
inspection of the highlighted CAMs, we observed that our adaptive
approach produced more concentrated regions, providing a clearer
and more focused explanation. This effect was most pronounced in
blood cell classification, where the CAM became smaller and more
focused as the amount of injected noise decreased (increasing 𝜀).
In terms of the effect of the FL client set size and their data
heterogeneity, as shown in Figure 2b, ROAD explainability scores
followed a consistent hierarchy across both models: IID yielded the
highest scores, followed by label shift, with covariate shift produc-
ing the lowest. Increasing the number of clients had a small positive
effect under IID and label shift, consistent with the regularizing
benefit of aggregating diverse client updates. Notably, ResNet-18
exhibited a smaller gap between distribution types, with its ROAD
score under covariate shift reaching approximately 35% compared
to under 15% for EfficientNet-B0, suggesting greater robustness to
visual perturbations in non-IID conditions.
6.3
Trade-off Analysis Between Privacy,
Predictive Performance and Explainability
In the following sections, we addressed RQ2 and RQ3 by measuring
the privacy-utility and privacy-explainability efficiency as the gain
in performance or explanation fidelity (Δ𝐹1 or Δ𝑅𝑂𝐴𝐷) per unit
increase in normalized cumulative privacy loss (Δ𝜀).
6.3.1
Privacy-Utility Efficiency. Figure 4 summarizes how well each
model configuration converts privacy expenditure into predictive
gains. Across all datasets, the adaptive noise injection strategy
consistently produced more favorable efficiency trends compared to
the static baseline. For example, in the blood cell classification task
(Fig. 4a), the adaptive model achieved a substantially larger utility
gain, increasing the F1-score from 0.20 to 0.72 by the last training
round. This corresponds to a utility-to-privacy-loss ratio (Δ𝐹1/Δ𝜀)
of 0.223 for the adaptive configuration compared with 0.178 for the
static one, confirming the higher privacy-utility efficiency achieved
under adaptive noise calibration. While both ratios are below 1, this
is expected in FL with DP, where cumulative privacy loss typically
grows faster than performance gains.
The skin melanoma classification task (Fig. 4c) exhibited the
strongest efficiency improvement with our adaptive model, achiev-
ing nearly double the efficiency of the static baseline by boosting
F1 early in training, when privacy loss is still low (Δ𝐹1/Δ𝜀ratio
of 0.209 and 0.106 for the adaptive and static training strategies,
respectively). Moreover, while the blood cell task showed a roughly
linear efficiency trend, the pneumonia detection task did not fol-
low a clear linear pattern, suggesting dataset-dependent dynamics
in how privacy and performance interact. Overall, these results
demonstrate that adaptive noise injection can translate privacy loss
into larger performance gains than static training.
6.3.2
Privacy-Explainability Efficiency. We observed a similar pat-
tern when evaluating explainability efficiency (Fig. 5). Note that
while the trend is not strictly monotonic across training rounds, the
adaptive approach consistently achieved higher efficiency across all
three tasks. For example, in the blood cell classification task (Fig. 5a),
the adaptive model reached a local maximum ROAD score after
using only 20% of its normalized privacy budget, demonstrating
that strong explanation quality can be achieved at relatively low
privacy cost. In contrast, the static baseline peaked only after con-
suming roughly 80% of its privacy budget. Numerically, this yielded
a Δ𝑅𝑂𝐴𝐷/Δ𝜀ratio of 82.12 for the adaptive configuration, com-
pared with only 10.57 for the static one. For pneumonia detection
(Fig. 5b), the static model reached its maximum ROAD score early
in training and showed no further improvement. In contrast, the
adaptive model continued to increase explanation fidelity through-
out training, resulting in a higher privacy-explainability ratio of
Δ𝑅𝑂𝐴𝐷/Δ𝜀= 6.60. A similar pattern was observed in melanoma de-
tection (Fig. 5c), where the adaptive model achieved a steeper early
rise in the ROAD score and higher efficiency (ΔROAD/Δ𝜀= 33.35),
while the static model peaked after greater privacy expenditure
(ratio of 26.51).
The magnitude of the efficiency improvement varied across
datasets. The blood cell classification task exhibited the largest
privacy-explainability efficiency gain (approximately eightfold),
which we attribute to the spatially compact and well-localized na-
ture of blood cell features. In contrast, the melanoma task showed
a more modest gain (1.3×), consistent with the observation that
dermoscopic features are more distributed across the image, leading
to lower saliency concentration scores and a more conservative
noise reduction. The chest X-ray task showed an intermediate gain
of 3.3× over static DP training, lower than the blood cell task, which
we attribute to the fact that grayscale images produce less discrimi-
native Grad-CAM maps, limiting the composite signal’s dynamic
range. These dataset-dependent patterns suggest that the efficiency
gains of adaptive noise calibration are strongest when the task
admits spatially concentrated explanatory features.
6.3.3
Comparing Performance and Explainability Dynamics. A closer
examination of the temporal dynamics in Figures 4 and 5 reveals a
structural difference between performance and explainability tra-
jectories. In the blood cell task (Fig. 5a), the adaptive model reached
a peak ROAD score after consuming approximately 20% of its nor-
malized privacy budget, after which explanation fidelity plateaued.
In contrast, the corresponding F1-score in Figure 4a continued to
increase steadily throughout training. This decoupling suggests
that the gradient components most relevant to explanation quality
converge earlier than those driving predictive accuracy. For the
pneumonia detection task (Fig. 5b), the static model’s ROAD score
peaked within the first 30% of training and then stagnated, whereas
the adaptive model sustained steady improvement throughout, in-
dicating that explainability-aware noise calibration prevents the
early saturation of explanation quality observed under static noise.
These patterns were consistent across datasets, with the timing of
the ROAD peak varying by task but always preceding the point at
which F1-score stabilized.
Taken together, the efficiency results reveal a fundamental asym-
metry in how privacy loss affects predictive performance and expla-
nation fidelity. The F1-score curves in Figure 4 follow approximately
monotonic, near-linear trajectories across all three datasets, consis-
tent with the standard assumption in privacy-utility analyses that
10


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
F1-score
Static ( F1/
=0.178)
Adaptive ( F1/
=0.223)
(a) Blood cells
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
0.48
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
F1-score
Static ( F1/
=0.071)
Adaptive ( F1/
=0.090)
(b) Chest X-rays
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
0.525
0.550
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
0.675
0.700
0.725
F1-score
Static ( F1/
=0.106)
Adaptive ( F1/
=0.209)
(c) Melanoma
Figure 4: Privacy-utility efficiency of global FL models across datasets, comparing FL+DP training with static DP noise and our
adaptive XCal-FL training (𝜀= 0.5 with 𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1). Efficiency is defined as the ratio of F1 score to the cumulative privacy loss.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
10
20
30
40
50
60
ROAD
Static ( ROAD/
=10.577)
Adaptive ( ROAD/
=82.126)
(a) Blood cells
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
2
4
6
8
10
12
ROAD
Static ( ROAD/
=1.955)
Adaptive ( ROAD/
=6.601)
(b) Chest X-rays
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized cumulative privacy loss
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
ROAD
Static ( ROAD/
=26.510)
Adaptive ( ROAD/
=33.357)
(c) Melanoma
Figure 5: Privacy-explainability efficiency for global FL models across datasets, comparing FL+DP training with static DP
noise and our adaptive XCal-FL training (𝜀= 0.5 with 𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1). ROAD curves were smoothed using LOWESS smoothing.
Efficiency is defined as the ratio of ROAD score to the cumulative privacy loss.
more privacy budget expenditure yields proportionally more utility.
The ROAD curves in Figure 5, however, exhibit qualitatively non-
monotonic trajectories that reflect unstable behavior. This asym-
metry implies that the privacy-explainability trade-off cannot be
inferred from the privacy-utility trade-off alone, and that optimiz-
ing one does not guarantee optimization of the other. This temporal
asymmetry also has a practical implication for privacy-sensitive
deployments: if explanation fidelity is a primary objective, training
can be terminated earlier than would be optimal for predictive per-
formance alone, thereby saving privacy budget. This demonstrates
empirically that performance and explainability follow fundamen-
tally different dynamics under cumulative differential privacy loss
in FL, motivating the need for dedicated privacy-explainability
evaluation frameworks.
7
Ablation Study: Explainability Signal Weights
To assess the individual and combined contributions of the three
components within our explainability-guided noise calibration sig-
nal, we conducted an ablation study using seven different weight
configurations. These configurations, summarized in Table 5, con-
sist of isolated component tests (where one of the components
is active during training, while the others are ignored), balanced
baselines (where all components are activated), relative importance
comparisons, and concentration scaling variations. For each con-
figuration, we report predictive performance (macro F1 score) and
explainability quality (ROAD score) across all datasets.
7.1
Predictive Performance
Figure 6b presents the F1 scores across all configurations and
noise levels for the Melanoma dataset. All configurations con-
verged to comparable F1 scores (0.75–0.88) at relaxed privacy levels
(𝜀≥5), indicating robustness to moderate variations in component
weights. Under stricter privacy (𝜀≤0.5), the Balanced configura-
tion (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) demonstrated the strongest performance,
while the Amplified Saliency Concentration variant (𝛾= 2) showed
degraded performance at 𝜀= 0.05, suggesting that overly aggres-
sive concentration scaling may be detrimental under high-noise
conditions. We attribute the robustness of the Balanced configura-
tion to the complementary nature of the three signal components,
which together provide a comprehensive characterization of each
sample’s explainability quality, enabling finer-grained noise cal-
ibration that preserves predictive performance even under strict
privacy constraints. Hence, relying on a single component, by con-
trast, captures only a partial view of the model’s reasoning, leading
to suboptimal noise allocation and reduced utility. Results for the
remaining datasets, which exhibit consistent trends, are provided
in Figure 7 in Appendix E.
11


Table 5: Configurations of explainability signal component weights used in the ablation study. The weights 𝛼, 𝛽, and𝛾correspond
to the logit change, counterfactual margin, and saliency concentration components, respectively.
Configuration
𝛼
𝛽
𝛾
Description
Isolated Components
Pure Logit Change
1.0
0.0
0.0
Only the logit change component is active
Pure Counterfactual Margin
0.0
1.0
0.0
Only the counterfactual margin component is active
Balanced Baseline
Balanced
1.0
1.0
1.0
All components equally weighted
Relative Importance
Logit Change-dominant
2.0
1.0
1.0
Logit change weighted twice as much as counterfactual margin
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
1.0
2.0
1.0
Counterfactual margin weighted twice as much as logit change
Concentration Scaling
Dampened Saliency Conc.
1.0
1.0
0.5
Balanced components with square-root saliency concentration
Amplified Saliency Conc.
1.0
1.0
2.0
Balanced components with squared saliency concentration
Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F1 score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(a) Performance (F1 score)
Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
ROAD score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(b) Explainability (ROAD score)
Figure 6: Ablation analysis of the effect of signal component
weights on predictive performance (F1 score) and explainabil-
ity (ROAD score) across privacy guarantee levels (𝜀) for the
Melanoma dataset. Each configuration varies the weights of
the logit change (𝛼), counterfactual margin (𝛽), and saliency
concentration (𝛾) components.
7.2
Explainability
Figure 6a presents the ROAD scores across configurations and noise
levels for the Melanoma dataset. Explainability differences across
configurations were more pronounced than for predictive perfor-
mance, highlighting the importance of component selection for
explainability quality. The Balanced configuration achieved the
highest ROAD scores at most noise levels, with particularly strong
explainability at 𝜀= 50 (ROAD change of 110%). Interestingly, the
Pure Logit Change configuration (𝛼= 1, 𝛽= 0,𝛾= 0) showed com-
petitive explainability at 𝜀= 0.5, but this did not generalize across
other noise levels. The concentration scaling variants show inter-
mediate performance, while the Counterfactual Margin-dominant
configuration (𝛼= 1, 𝛽= 2,𝛾= 1) exhibited lower and more vari-
able ROAD scores. These findings support our design choice of
incorporating all three components (Δℓ, 𝑚cf, and 𝑐) rather than
relying on a single signal. We note that the optimal configuration in
terms of its effect on explanation fidelity can be dataset-dependent,
as discussed in Appendix E.
8
Execution Runtime Complexity Analysis
We analyzed the execution runtime complexity of XCal-FL with
respect to our used hardware (a machine with a 64GB of RAM and
a NVIDIA’s RTX 2080 Ti GPU) across all three datasets and our two
evaluated model architectures. A standard DP-SGD training step
costs approximately 3𝐹+𝑂(𝑃) per mini-batch, where 𝐹is the cost of
a single training-mode forward pass and 𝑃is the total number of pa-
rameters [1, 24]. XCal-FL introduces a modest overhead by adding
an explainability-driven signal computation per mini-batch, which
consists of two inference-mode forward passes (one on the original
input and one on the masked input) and subsequent saliency mask
operations. The privacy filter adds one RDP accountant query per
mini-batch, whose cost is negligible relative to the forward passes.
Empirically, across our evaluated architectures and datasets, this
translates to a small absolute per-round increase in wall-clock time
for each client compared to standard DP-SGD (typically 1–3 sec-
onds). Crucially, this computational overhead is purely local and
does not increase the payload size or communication costs, which
remain the primary bottleneck in cross-silo FL environments. Given
the simultaneous gains in accuracy and explainability, this mod-
erate computational overhead represents a favorable trade-off for
privacy-sensitive applications, such as clinical imaging. A more de-
tailed wall-clock benchmarks across all configurations are provided
in Appendix F.
12


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
9
Discussion and Limitations
This work introduced XCal-FL, an adaptive noise control mech-
anism for DP-FL that calibrates noise using a composite signal
combining explainability- and decision-related measures. The three
signal components offer complementary contributions: the logit
change preserves learning from informative salient regions, the
counterfactual margin sharpens decision boundaries, and the saliency
concentration favors compact attention patterns. Together, these
components enable finer-grained noise calibration than any single
component alone, as confirmed by our ablation study (Section 7),
where the balanced configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) consistently
achieved the strongest or most robust results across datasets and
privacy levels. This approach is motivated by prior findings that
DP mechanisms with similar nominal privacy guarantees can yield
different downstream behavior [15, 27], and extends recent work
on explainability-aware adaptive noise allocation in FL [30].
In terms of privacy preservation, the calculated noise multiplier
𝜎step in our proposed method is always bounded within the symmet-
ric band [𝜎min, 𝜎max], and the formal (𝜀, 𝛿)-DP guarantee is enforced
by a Rényi accountant [46] that charges the accountant the realized
cost of every step and prevents any update that would exceed the
allocated budget (Appendix B). XCal-FL therefore provides exactly
the same formal guarantee as standard DP-SGD calibrated to the
same (𝜀, 𝛿), while redistributing the privacy expenditure across
training steps. Our adaptive noise calibration redistributes noise
across training steps more efficiently than in previous methods,
such as the AGP [30], translating a given privacy budget into larger
gains in both utility and explainability (Figures 4 and 5). These
results align with prior findings that careful noise handling can im-
prove the privacy-utility trade-off in DP-FL [28], and extend them
to the privacy-explainability dimension. XCal-FL also consistently
outperformed AGP [30], yielding over 10% higher predictive perfor-
mance and more than 75% improvements in explanation fidelity on
average, demonstrating that dynamic noise magnitude calibration
provides advantages beyond static channel-level noise suppression.
Our empirical results further validate the signal-dependent regular-
ization interpretation introduced in Section 4.3: when the explain-
ability signal is high, reduced noise preserves informative gradient
components that reinforce causally meaningful representations,
i.e., when the signal is low, higher noise acts as regularization that
prevents overfitting to spurious or diffuse patterns. This mechanism
functions as an automatic mechanism that tightens regularization
on poorly explained samples and loosens it on well-explained ones.
We further observed that while predictive performance improved
approximately monotonically with increasing privacy loss, explain-
ability exhibited non-linear dynamics, with ROAD scores peaking
early in training before stabilizing (Fig. 5) for some configurations.
This behavior is consistent with the known sensitivity of gradient-
based attributions to perturbations [52] and with theoretical find-
ings that gradient-based saliency maps are inherently unstable
under training stochasticity [51], an effect that DP-SGD amplifies
through its per-step noise injection. This finding carries broader
implications: standard privacy-utility analyses are insufficient to
capture the full impact of DP on model behavior, and explainability
requires dedicated evaluation as a distinct dimension of the privacy
trade-off.
Applicability Limitations. XCal-FL is designed for image clas-
sification and is applicable to privacy-sensitive computer vision
settings beyond clinical imaging, such as autonomous driving, wher-
ever Grad-CAM-based attribution is applicable. However, the ex-
plainability signal is tied to Grad-CAM specifically, so substituting
a different attribution method may alter the signal characteristics
and require re-tuning the composite score. More broadly, testing
applicability to non-vision domains, where gradient-based saliency
maps are not directly available, remains a future research direction.
Beyond the task domain, our cross-silo evaluations across 𝑁=
3, 10, 50 clients (Figure 2) show moderate and sometimes inconsis-
tent scaling gains, particularly under covariate shift, suggesting the
method is best suited to cross-silo deployments and may require
adaptation for large-scale cross-device settings. Moreover, the two
additional inference-mode forward passes per mini-batch incur up
to 80% overhead relative to standard DP-SGD (Section 8), which,
while acceptable in cross-silo settings with sufficient compute, may
be challenging for resource-constrained clients. In terms of pri-
vacy granularity, our mechanism provides record-level (𝜀,𝛿)-DP,
protecting individual training images. Since a single patient may
contribute multiple images, however, the cumulative information
leakage across a patient’s records is not formally bounded at the
patient level. Providing user-level DP guarantees would require
additional mechanisms such as per-patient gradient grouping and is
left as future work. In addition, while the balanced weight configura-
tion generalizes well across our evaluated datasets, optimal weights
can be dataset-dependent (e.g., dampened saliency concentration
proved superior for Chest X-rays), requiring empirical tuning dur-
ing real-world deployment. Finally, a further consequence of the
filter-based design [16] is that a client may exhaust its gradient
budget before completing all 𝑇rounds if the signal keeps the noise
persistently below 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓, leading to an early halt of noisy updates.
This behavior makes the total privacy expenditure identical to the
static baseline by construction, at the cost of a possibly shorter
effective training horizon. An investigation of other DP accountant
is left to future work.
10
Conclusion
This paper introduced XCal-FL, an explainability-driven training
approach with adaptive Differential Privacy for Federated Learn-
ing that calibrates noise based on explanation signals to balance
privacy, utility, and explanation fidelity. Experiments on medical
imaging tasks show that XCal-FL consistently outperforms fixed-
noise DP-SGD, achieving over 10% higher performance and more
than 75% higher fidelity of attribution-based explanations than
state-of-the-art methods for adaptive DP in FL. In addition, our ap-
proach achieves up to 25% higher privacy-utility efficiency and up to
threefold higher privacy-explainability efficiency, allowing trained
FL models to translate the incurred privacy loss into larger gains in
both predictive performance and explanation fidelity than standard
DP-SGD training with static DP noise. This supports interpretable
and trustworthy decision-making in safety-critical decision-support
applications.
13


Acknowledgments
Ethical Considerations
This research relies exclusively on publicly available datasets ob-
tained from official data releases [8, 39, 45]. Although these datasets
originate from the medical domain, they were released in anonymized
form by their respective providers, and no re-identification was
attempted in our experimental setting. No personally identifiable
information was collected, processed, or stored at any stage of this
work. We have complied with the terms of use specified by each
data provider (CC-BY-NC for the ISIC Melanoma dataset [39]; MIT
license for the Blood Cells dataset [8]; CC0 1.0 Universal license
for the NIH Chest X-ray dataset [45]). The research poses minimal
risk, as it involves only secondary analysis of existing public data
and does not involve human participants, or interaction with vul-
nerable populations. Therefore, ethical approval from an IRB was
not required.
Open Science
An anonymous repository containing our code is available at https://
osf.io/xr9nt/overview?view_only=b0fd7b2b88a94578abd06dacb5d19fad.
The repository includes the implementation of the proposed XCal-
FL training procedure, covering both client-side training (imple-
menting explainability-driven FL training with differentially private
noise calibration) and server-side aggregation, the two evaluated
model architectures, and configuration files for reproducing the
reported experiments. The datasets used in this work are publicly
available from their respective providers and are therefore not re-
distributed in the repository.
AI Use
We used generative AI-based tools to revise the text, improve flow,
and correct typos, grammatical errors, and awkward phrasing. We
have manually verified the text and are responsible for the accuracy,
originality, and integrity of it.
References
[1] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov,
Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep Learning with Differential Privacy. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (Vienna, Austria) (CCS ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318
[2] Mohammed Adnan, Shivam Kalra, Jesse C Cresswell, Graham W Taylor, and
Hamid R Tizhoosh. 2022. Federated learning and differential privacy for medical
image analysis. Scientific reports 12, 1 (2022), 1953. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
022-05539-7
[3] Mário S Alvim, Miguel E Andrés, Konstantinos Chatzikokolakis, Pierpaolo
Degano, and Catuscia Palamidessi. 2012. Differential privacy: on the trade-
off between utility and information leakage. In Formal Aspects of Security and
Trust: 8th International Workshop, FAST 2011, Leuven, Belgium, September 12-14,
2011. Revised Selected Papers 8. Springer, 39–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-29420-4_3
[4] Galen Andrew, Om Thakkar, Brendan McMahan, and Swaroop Ramaswamy.
2021. Differentially Private Learning with Adaptive Clipping. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (Eds.), Vol. 34. Curran Associates,
Inc., 17455–17466. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
91cff01af640a24e7f9f7a5ab407889f-Paper.pdf
[5] Chioma Virginia Anikwe, Henry Friday Nweke, Anayo Chukwu Ikegwu, Chuk-
wunonso Adolphus Egwuonwu, Fergus Uchenna Onu, Uzoma Rita Alo, and
Ying Wah Teh. 2022. Mobile and wearable sensors for data-driven health moni-
toring system: State-of-the-art and future prospect. Expert Systems with Appli-
cations 202 (2022), 117362. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S095741742200714X
[6] Gustav A Baumgart, Jaemin Shin, Ali Payani, Myungjin Lee, and Ramana Rao
Kompella. 2024. Not all federated learning algorithms are created equal: A
performance evaluation study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17287 (2024).
[7] Eleni Briola, Christos Chrysanthos Nikolaidis, Vasileios Perifanis, Nikolaos
Pavlidis, and Pavlos Efraimidis. 2024. A federated explainable AI model for
breast cancer classification. In Proceedings of the 2024 European Interdisci-
plinary Cybersecurity Conference (Xanthi, Greece) (EICC ’24). 194–201. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3655693.3660255
[8] Shenggan Cheng and Nicolas Chen. 2018. BCCD: Blood Cell Count and Detection.
https://github.com/Shenggan/BCCD_Dataset
[9] Council of the European Union. 2016. General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR). https://gdpr-info.eu/ Accessed: October 18, 2025.
[10] Jiawei Duan, Haibo Hu, Qingqing Ye, and Xinyue Sun. 2025. Analyzing and
optimizing perturbation of dp-sgd geometrically. In 2025 IEEE 41st International
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE, 3439–3452.
[11] Sivan Durga, Esther Daniel, Surleese Seetha, Vijaya Kumar Reshma, and Vasily
Sachnev. 2025. FLEM-XAI: Federated Learning based real time Ensemble Model
with explainable AI framework for an efficient diagnosis of Lung Diseases. Fron-
tiers in Computer Science 7 (2025), 1633916. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2025.
1633916
[12] Cynthia Dwork, Vitaly Feldman, Moritz Hardt, Toni Pitassi, Omer Reingold,
and Aaron Roth. 2015. Generalization in Adaptive Data Analysis and Hold-
out Reuse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, C. Cortes,
N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 28. Curran
Associates, Inc.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/file/
bad5f33780c42f2588878a9d07405083-Paper.pdf
[13] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. 2006. Cali-
brating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography
conference. Springer, 265–284. https://doi.org/10.1007/11681878_14
[14] Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differ-
ential privacy. Foundations and trends® in theoretical computer science 9, 3–4
(2014), 211–407.
[15] Fatima Ezzeddine, Mirna Saad, Omran Ayoub, Davide Andreoletti, Martin
Gjoreski, Ihab Sbeity, Marc Langheinrich, and Silvia Giordano. 2024. Differ-
ential Privacy for Anomaly Detection: Analyzing the Trade-Off Between Privacy
and Explainability. In Explainable Artificial Intelligence. Springer, Springer Nature
Switzerland, Cham, 294–318. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-63800-8_15
[16] Vitaly Feldman and Tijana Zrnic. 2021. Individual Privacy Accounting via a
Rényi Filter. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, M. Ranzato,
A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (Eds.), Vol. 34.
Curran Associates, Inc., 28080–28091. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2021/file/ec7f346604f518906d35ef0492709f78-Paper.pdf
[17] Jie Fu, Zhili Chen, and Xiao Han. 2022. Adap DP-FL: Differentially Private
Federated Learning with Adaptive Noise. In 2022 IEEE International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom).
656–663. doi:10.1109/TrustCom56396.2022.00094
[18] Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah Dröge, and Michael Moeller.
2020.
Inverting gradients-how easy is it to break privacy in federated
learning?
Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020),
16937–16947.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
c4ede56bbd98819ae6112b20ac6bf145-Paper.pdf
[19] Jacob Gildenblat and contributors. 2021. PyTorch library for CAM methods.
https://github.com/jacobgil/pytorch-grad-cam
[20] Valentin Hartmann, Vincent Bindschaedler, Alexander Bentkamp, and Robert
West. 2022. Privacy accounting 𝜀conomics: Improving differential privacy com-
position via a posteriori bounds. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies
2022, 3 (2022), 222–246. doi:10.56553/popets-2022-0070
[21] Valentin Hartmann, Vincent Bindschaedler, Alexander Bentkamp, and Robert
West. 2022. Privacy accounting 𝜀conomics: Improving differential privacy com-
position via a posteriori bounds. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies
2022, 3 (2022), 222–246. doi:10.56553/popets-2022-0070
[22] Ahmad Hassanpour, Amir Zarei, Khawla Mallat, Anderson Santana de Oliveira,
and Bian Yang. 2025. The Impact of Generalization Techniques on the Interplay
Among Privacy, Utility, and Fairness in Image Classification. Proceedings on
Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2025, 2 (2025), 226–242. doi:10.56553/popets-
2025-0059
[23] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep Resid-
ual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
[24] Marius Hobbhahn and Jaime Sevilla. 2021. Whatś the backward-forward FLOP
ratio for neural networks? https://epoch.ai/blog/backward-forward-FLOP-ratio
Accessed: 2026-03-30.
[25] Meirui Jiang, Yuan Zhong, Anjie Le, Xiaoxiao Li, and Qi Dou. 2023. Client-level
differential privacy via adaptive intermediary in federated medical imaging. In
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. Springer, Springer, Cham, 500–510. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-43895-0_47
14


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
[26] Jiayin Jin, Jiaxiang Ren, Yang Zhou, Lingjuan Lyu, Ji Liu, and Dejing Dou.
2022.
Accelerated Federated Learning with Decoupled Adaptive Optimiza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162). PMLR, 10298–10322.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/jin22e.html
[27] Georgios Kaissis, Stefan Kolek, Borja Balle, Jamie Hayes, and Daniel Rueckert.
2024. Beyond the Calibration Point: Mechanism Comparison in Differential
Privacy. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 235). PMLR, 22840–22860. https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kaissis24a.html
[28] Yuecheng Li, Lele Fu, Tong Wang, Jian Lou, Bin Chen, Lei Yang, Jian Shen,
Zibin Zheng, and Chuan Chen. 2025. Clients Collaborate: Flexible Differen-
tially Private Federated Learning with Guaranteed Improvement of Utility-
Privacy Trade-off. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 267), Aarti Singh,
Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan
Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu (Eds.). PMLR, 34333–34354.
https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25n.html
[29] Yifan Li, Yuechen He, Yufei Fu, and Sizhe Shan. 2023. Privacy preserved federated
learning for skin cancer diagnosis. In 2023 IEEE 3rd International Conference on
Power, Electronics and Computer Applications (ICPECA). IEEE, 27–33.
https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICPECA56706.2023.10075862
[30] Zhe Li, Honglong Chen, Zhichen Ni, Yudong Gao, and Wei Lou. 2024. Towards
Adaptive Privacy Protection for Interpretable Federated Learning. IEEE Transac-
tions on Mobile Computing 23, 12 (2024), 14471–14483. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TMC.2024.3443862
[31] Zexi Li, Tao Lin, Xinyi Shang, and Chao Wu. 2023. Revisiting Weighted Aggre-
gation in Federated Learning with Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, Vol. 202). PMLR, 19767–19788.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
li23s.html
[32] Luis M Lopez-Ramos, Florian Leiser, Aditya Rastogi, Steven Hicks, Inga Strümke,
Vince I Madai, Tobias Budig, Ali Sunyaev, and Adam Hilbert. 2024. Interplay
between Federated Learning and Explainable Artificial Intelligence: a Scoping
Review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05874 (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2411.05874
[33] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and
Blaise Aguera y Arcas. 2017. Communication-efficient learning of deep net-
works from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics (Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research). PMLR, PMLR, 1273–1282. https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html
[34] H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2018. Learn-
ing Differentially Private Recurrent Language Models. International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2018). https://openreview.net/forum?id=
BJ0hF1Z0b
[35] Ilya Mironov. 2017. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security
foundations symposium (CSF). IEEE, 263–275.
[36] Nicolas Papernot and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. 2021. How to deploy machine
learning with Differential Privacy. https://www.nist.gov/blogs/cybersecurity-
insights/how-deploy-machine-learning-differential-privacy
[37] Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Alex Kurakin, Zheng Xu, Carson Deni-
son, H Brendan McMahan, Sergei Vassilvitskii, Steve Chien, and Abhradeep Guha
Thakurta. 2023. How to dp-fy ml: A practical guide to machine learning with
differential privacy. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 77 (2023), 1113–1201.
https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.14649
[38] Yao Rong, Tobias Leemann, Vadim Borisov, Gjergji Kasneci, and Enkelejda
Kasneci. 2022. A Consistent and Efficient Evaluation Strategy for Attribution
Methods. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162). PMLR, 18770–18795.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/rong22a.html
[39] Veronica Rotemberg, Nicholas Kurtansky, Brigid Betz-Stablein, Liam Caffery,
Emmanouil Chousakos, Noel Codella, Marc Combalia, Stephen Dusza, Pascale
Guitera, David Gutman, et al. 2021. A patient-centric dataset of images and
metadata for identifying melanomas using clinical context. Scientific data 8, 1
(2021), 34. doi:10.1038/s41597-021-00815-z
[40] Saifullah Saifullah, Dominique Mercier, Adriano Lucieri, Andreas Dengel, and
Sheraz Ahmed. 2024. The privacy-explainability trade-off: unraveling the impacts
of differential privacy and federated learning on attribution methods. Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence 7 (2024), 1236947. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2024.1236947
[41] Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2017.
Grad-CAM: Vi-
sual Explanations From Deep Networks via Gradient-Based Localization.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV). https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_iccv_2017/html/Selvaraju_Grad-
CAM_Visual_Explanations_ICCV_2017_paper.html
[42] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. 2019. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for
Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 97).
PMLR, 6105–6114. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/tan19a.html
[43] United States Congress. 1996. Health Insurance Portability and Accountabil-
ity Act of 1996.
https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/health-insurance-portability-
accountability-act-1996 Accessed: October 18, 2025.
[44] Hui-Po Wang, Dingfan Chen, Raouf Kerkouche, and Mario Fritz. 2024. FedLAP-
DP: Federated Learning by Sharing Differentially Private Loss Approximations.
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024, 3 (2024), 372–390. doi:10.
56553/popets-2024-0083
[45] Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri,
and Ronald M Summers. 2017.
ChestX-ray8: Hospital-Scale Chest X-
Ray Database and Benchmarks on Weakly-Supervised Classification and
Localization of Common Thorax Diseases. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2097–
2106. https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2017/html/Wang_ChestX-
ray8_Hospital-Scale_Chest_CVPR_2017_paper.html
[46] Yu-Xiang Wang, Borja Balle, and Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan. 2019. Subsam-
pled Rényi differential privacy and analytical moments accountant. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
tics (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 89). PMLR, PMLR, 1226–1235.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/wang19b.html
[47] Justin Whitehouse, Aaditya Ramdas, Ryan Rogers, and Steven Wu. 2023. Fully-
Adaptive Composition in Differential Privacy. In Proceedings of the 40th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, Vol. 202), Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 36990–37007.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/whitehouse23a.html
[48] Ann-Christin Woerl, Jan Disselhoff, and Michael Wand. 2023. Initialization noise
in image gradients and saliency maps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1766–1775.
[49] Zheng Xu and Yanxiang Zhang. 2024. Advances in private training for production
on-device language models. https://research.google/blog/advances-in-private-
training-for-production-on-device-language-models/ Accessed: April 13, 2025.
[50] Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. 2019. Federated Ma-
chine Learning: Concept and Applications. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 10, 2,
Article 12 (2019), 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3298981
[51] Zhuorui Ye and Farzan Farnia. 2025. Gaussian Smoothing in Saliency Maps:
The Stability-Fidelity Trade-Off in Neural Network Interpretability. In Proceed-
ings of The 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
tics (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 258), Yingzhen Li, Stephan
Mandt, Shipra Agrawal, and Emtiyaz Khan (Eds.). PMLR, 2125–2133.
https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v258/ye25a.html
[52] Eslam Zaher, Maciej Trzaskowski, Quan Nguyen, and Fred Roosta. 2024. Man-
ifold Integrated Gradients: Riemannian Geometry for Feature Attribution. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 235). PMLR, 58090–58104.
https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zaher24a.html
[53] Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. 2019.
Deep Leakage from Gradi-
ents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 32. Curran
Associates, Inc.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
60a6c4002cc7b29142def8871531281a-Paper.pdf
Appendix
A
FL with Adaptive Explainability-Driven
Client Training (Server Side)
Algorithm 2 outlines the server-side procedure of our explainability-
driven DP-FL framework, utilizing the notation defined in Table 2,
building upon the standard Federated Averaging (FedAvg) protocol
[33]. The server is parameterized by three types of parameters, as
follows.
• FL parameters including the number of global rounds 𝑇
and the client set M with |M| = 𝑁.
• Local training parameters Φtr, including the client mod-
els’ learning rate 𝜂and the batch size 𝐵.
• Explainability parameters Φexpl, defined by the proposed
method in Section 4.1.
• Differential Privacy parameters Φdp, consisting of the
clipping norm 𝐶, the reference multiplier 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓and the band
factor𝑏defining the noise range [𝜎min, 𝜎max] and the failure
probability 𝛿, which quantifies the relaxation of 𝜀-DP and
15


is fixed to a small constant in accordance with standard DP
practice [37].
At each round 𝑡, the server samples a subset of 𝑚clients 𝑆𝑡⊂M
and distributes the current global model w𝑡−1 to sampled clients.
Upon receiving the model, each client 𝑖∈𝑆𝑡executes the adaptive
explainability-driven training locally (based on DP-SGD algorithm
[33]) described in Section 4. We collect the locally trained (and
differentially private) model parameters w𝑡
𝑖, and the client’s cumu-
lative privacy loss 𝜀cum for privacy accounting. The server then
performs standard weighted aggregation to derive the aggregated
model parameters w𝑡and broadcasts this updated global model to
all clients for the subsequent round.
Algorithm 2: FL with Adaptive Explainability-Driven
Client Training (Server Side)
Input: FL parameters: global rounds 𝑇; client set M;
Training parameters Φtr = (𝜂, 𝐵); DP parameters
Φdp = (𝐶, 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑓,𝑏,𝛿, 𝜌); Explainability parameters
Φexpl = (𝑞, 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾, 𝜏)
Output: w𝑇final global model parameters
1 Initialize global model w0;
2 for 𝑡= 1 →𝑇do
3
Sample a subset of clients 𝑆𝑡⊂M (|𝑆𝑡| = 𝑚);
4
forall client 𝑖∈𝑆𝑡with 𝑛𝑖samples do
5
w𝑡
𝑖←XCal-Client w𝑡−1, D𝑖, Φtr, Φexpl, Φdp
;
6
end
7
w𝑡←
1
Í
𝑖∈𝑆𝑡𝑛𝑖
Í
𝑖∈𝑆𝑡𝑛𝑖w𝑡
𝑖;
// Aggregation
8
Broadcast w𝑡to all clients;
9 end
B
Privacy Guarantee Under Adaptive Noise
Calibration
We demonstrate that XCal-FL satisfies the target (𝜀,𝛿)-DP guar-
antee under fully adaptive composition [47], using a privacy fil-
ter [16] to enforce the gradient budget. The overall budget is par-
titioned into two components: a budget of (𝜀𝑠,𝛿𝑠) allocated to the
computation of the explainability signals across all rounds, and a
budget of (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔) allocated to the gradient perturbations, so that
(𝜀,𝛿) = (𝜀𝑠+ 𝜀𝑔, 𝛿𝑠+ 𝛿𝑔).
The reference multiplier 𝜎ref is computed via binary search over
the Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP) accountant [35, 46] as the
constant value that exactly satisfies (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔)-DP over 𝑇training
steps at batch size 𝐵, and the adaptive multiplier is selected from
the symmetric band [𝜎min, 𝜎max] = [(1 −𝑏) 𝜎ref, (1 + 𝑏) 𝜎ref] with
0 < 𝑏< 1. Because 𝜎step may fall below 𝜎ref, adherence to the
gradient budget is not implied by the band itself. Instead, each
client runs a privacy filter: before each noisy update, the accountant
computes the cumulative privacy cost of all gradient releases so far,
including one additional step at the candidate 𝜎step, and the step is
admitted only if this cost remains within (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔); otherwise, 𝜎step
is clamped upward to the smallest admissible value in [𝜎step, 𝜎max],
and if no value in the band is admissible, the client halts noisy
updates for the remainder of training. Throughout, privacy costs are
tracked under the subsampling assumption discussed in Section 4.2,
which applies identically to XCal-FL and to the static baseline and
is orthogonal to the adaptive calibration analyzed here [37].
We establish the guarantee with respect to the adversary’s view
of the client’s training process, namely the full sequence of released
outputs: the privatized explainability signals and the noisy gradient
updates. Any quantity available to a party in our threat model,
including the local parameters w𝑡
𝑖received by the server and the re-
alized multipliers 𝜎step at iteration 𝑡, is obtained by post-processing
this sequence, so by the post-processing property of DP [14] the
guarantee extends to all of them.
Proposition B.1. Let the sequence of explainability signals ˜𝑠be
computed via an (𝜀𝑠,𝛿𝑠)-DP mechanism, and let the gradient noise
multipliers𝜎step ∈[𝜎min, 𝜎max] be selected as a post-processing of ˜𝑠,
subject to the privacy filter with budget (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔). Then XCal-FL satisfies
an overall (𝜀𝑠+ 𝜀𝑔, 𝛿𝑠+ 𝛿𝑔)-DP guarantee.
Proof. Step 1 (Signal Privacy). The raw explainability signal
𝑠raw is clipped to [0, 1], which bounds its sensitivity to any sin-
gle training record by 1. The mechanism 𝑀1 adds Gaussian noise
N (0, 𝜎2
𝑠) to the clipped signal. With 𝜎𝑠calibrated by the accoun-
tant to the composition of all 𝑇signal releases, the sequence of
privatized signals ˜𝑠satisfies the allocated (𝜀𝑠,𝛿𝑠)-DP budget.
Step 2 (Post-Processing and Adaptivity). The step-specific
multiplier 𝜎step is a deterministic function of the privatized signal
˜𝑠, the public band [𝜎min, 𝜎max], and the state of the privacy filter,
which is itself a function of previously released private outputs. By
the post-processing property of DP [14], computing 𝜎step incurs
no additional privacy loss. Moreover,since 𝜎step depends on the
training data only through previously released differentially private
outputs, its use as the noise parameter of the subsequent gradient
mechanism is admissible under adaptive composition [16, 47].
Step 3 (Filter Enforcement of the Gradient Budget). Let 𝑀2
denote the gradient-release mechanism, namely the composition
of all noisy gradient updates ˜𝑔𝑡produced during training, where
the 𝑡-th update is computed with the adaptively chosen multiplier
𝜎step,𝑡. Conditioned on all previously released outputs, each admit-
ted update of 𝑀2 is a standard DP-SGD step, i.e., a subsampled
Gaussian mechanism with a known multiplier 𝜎step, whose privacy
cost is computed by the accountant [1, 35]. Because the multipliers
are chosen adaptively, composition theorems for parameters fixed
in advance do not directly apply. The theory of privacy filters [16]
establishes that enforcing a fixed budget through the admission,
clamping, and halting rule described above yields a valid privacy
guarantee for 𝑀2: by construction, the realized cumulative privacy
cost of all gradient releases never exceeds 𝜀𝑔at failure probability
𝛿𝑔. Such filters have been instantiated for DP-SGD with adaptively
chosen noise [16], and this enforcement incurs no loss relative to
composition with parameters fixed in advance [47]. Note that the
guarantee does not depend on the lower band limit 𝜎min: the band
[𝜎min, 𝜎max] is a design parameter governing the calibration range,
while the budget is enforced solely by the filter. In particular, a
client whose signal keeps the noise persistently below 𝜎ref may
exhaust its gradient budget before completing all 𝑇steps, at which
point noisy updates halt; the total privacy expenditure therefore
never exceeds that of the static baseline, while the effective training
horizon may be shorter.
16


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
Step 4 (Sequential Composition). By the sequential composi-
tion property of DP [14], composing the (𝜀𝑠,𝛿𝑠)-DP signal mech-
anism 𝑀1 with the filtered, adaptively scaled (𝜀𝑔,𝛿𝑔)-DP gradient
mechanism 𝑀2 yields a total privacy loss bounded by (𝜀𝑠+𝜀𝑔, 𝛿𝑠+𝛿𝑔).
Hence, XCal-FL satisfies the target (𝜀,𝛿)-DP guarantee.
□
C
Description of Medical Imaging Datasets
Table 6 lists the datasets that were used for evaluation of our method.
The datasets are representative of medical imaging tasks prevalent
in real-world clinical use-cases, such as pneumonia detection using
chest X-ray scans or melanoma detection using skin lesions scans.
Table 6: Evaluation datasets from the healthcare domain
Dataset
Image
size
Train
size
Test
size
Classes
Blood cells [8]
3×150×150
9,996
2,487
Eosinophil;
Lymphocyte;
Monocyte;
Neutrophil
NIH Chest X-ray [45]
3×128×128 78,468
22,433
Normal;
Pneumonia
ISIC Melanoma [39]
3×64×64
9,605
1,000
Benign;
Malignant
D
Additional Results: Performance and
Explainability Across Datasets
Tables 7 and 8 present the F1 scores and ROAD explanation fidelity
scores, respectively, for all evaluated configurations across three
medical imaging datasets, two model architectures, and varying
numbers of FL clients under IID and non-IID data distributions.
E
Ablation Study: Additional Results
The signal score𝑠is computed as𝑠= (𝛼Δℓ+𝛽𝑚cf)𝑐𝛾, where Δℓmea-
sures the logit change after masking salient regions, 𝑚cf quantifies
the counterfactual margin, and 𝑐represents the saliency concen-
tration (see section 4.1). To assess the individual and combined
contributions of the three components in our explainability-guided
noise calibration signal, we conducted an ablation study across
seven configurations of the component weights (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾), where 𝛼
weights the logit change, 𝛽weights the counterfactual margin, and
𝛾scales the saliency concentration. These configurations, summa-
rized in Table 5, consist of isolated component tests (where one
of the components is active during training, while the others are
ignored), balanced baselines (where all components are activated),
relative importance comparisons, and concentration scaling vari-
ations. For each configuration, we report predictive performance
(macro F1 score) and explainability quality (ROAD score) across all
datasets.
E.1
Predictive Performance
Figure 7 presents the F1 scores across all configurations and noise
levels for the Blood Cells and Chest X-ray datasets, respectively. For
the Blood Cells dataset (Figure 7a), F1 scores were consistent across
configurations, particularly at higher privacy budgets (𝜀≥5), where
all configurations achieved F1 scores between 0.80 and 0.85. Dif-
ferences become more apparent under stricter privacy constraints
(𝜀≤0.5), where the balanced configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1)
achieved the highest F1 score at 𝜀= 0.5 (0.72), outperforming
both isolated component configurations and the concentration scal-
ing variants. The Counterfactual Margin-dominant configuration
(𝛽= 2, 𝛼= 𝛾= 1) showed slightly reduced performance at moder-
ate noise levels compared to the Balanced baseline.
For the Chest X-ray dataset (Figure 7b), F1 scores followed a
similar pattern, with all configurations achieving comparable per-
formance at relaxed privacy levels (𝜀≥5), ranging between 0.55
and 0.63. The Balanced configuration achieved the highest F1 scores
across most noise levels, reaching a score above 0.61 at both 𝜀= 5
and 𝜀= 50. Under stricter privacy (𝜀= 0.05), the Balanced configu-
ration maintained competitive performance (0.49), while the Logit
Change-dominant configuration (𝛼= 2, 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) showed the low-
est F1 score (0.43), suggesting that overweighting the logit change
component may harm predictive performance under high-noise
conditions for this dataset.
These results indicate that predictive performance is robust to
moderate variations in component weights across all three datasets,
with the Balanced configuration consistently performing well across
all noise levels. We attribute this robustness to the complementary
nature of the three signal components: the logit change captures
how much the model’s prediction depends on salient regions, the
counterfactual margin quantifies the decision boundary proximity,
and the saliency concentration measures how focused the model’s
attention is. When combined, these components provide a more
comprehensive characterization of each sample’s explainability
quality, enabling finer-grained noise calibration that preserves pre-
dictive performance even under strict privacy constraints. Relying
on a single component, by contrast, captures only a partial view of
the model’s reasoning, leading to suboptimal noise allocation and
reduced utility.
E.2
Explainability
As shown in Figure 8, explainability across configurations reveals
more pronounced differences than predictive performance, high-
lighting the importance of component selection for explainability
quality. For the Blood Cells dataset (Figure 8a), the Balanced and
Logit Change-dominant configurations (𝛼= 2, 𝛽= 𝛾= 1) achieved
the highest ROAD scores, particularly at relaxed privacy levels
(𝜀≥5), reaching a change in the model’s confidence above 250%. In
contrast, the isolated component configurations (Pure Logit Change
with 𝛼= 1, 𝛽= 0,𝛾= 0, and Pure Counterfactual Margin with
𝛼= 0, 𝛽= 1,𝛾= 0) yielded substantially lower ROAD scores
across all noise levels, indicating that combining both components
is beneficial for explainability.
For the Chest X-ray dataset (Figure 8b), the explainability results
exhibited a different pattern compared to the other datasets. The
Dampened Saliency Concentration configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 1,𝛾= 0.5)
achieved the highest ROAD scores across all noise levels, reaching
approximately 29% at 𝜀= 50 and 20% at 𝜀= 5. In contrast, the
Balanced configuration yielded lower ROAD scores (ranging from
6% to 14%), underperforming several other configurations including
17


Table 7: F1 scores of global models (𝜀=0.5) across three medical imaging datasets for varying FL client numbers, model
architectures and client data distribution patterns. XCal-FL models were trained with a balanced XCal-FL configuration
(𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1). Bold marks the higher (better) score between the two DP methods (FL+DP and XCal-FL) per configuration.
Centralized (non-FL) upper bounds — Melanoma: EfficientNet-B0 = .896, ResNet-18 = .911; BloodCells: EfficientNet-B0 = .862,
ResNet-18 = .855; Chest X-rays: EfficientNet-B0 = .680, ResNet-18 = .647.
Melanoma
BloodCells
ChestXray
Setting
Model
𝑵
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
IID
EfficientNet-B0
3
.777
.693
.712
.844
.654
.716
.669
.529
.600
EfficientNet-B0
10
.830
.720
.809
.876
.745
.815
.634
.535
.689
EfficientNet-B0
50
.818
.670
.822
.840
.689
.756
.618
.502
.662
ResNet-18
3
.862
.667
.811
.861
.740
.809
.639
.541
.555
ResNet-18
10
.870
.847
.818
.862
.733
.802
.631
.529
.583
ResNet-18
50
.872
.849
.889
.835
.685
.751
.612
.496
.597
Label
Shift
EfficientNet-B0
3
.783
.741
.650
.864
.685
.811
.638
.538
.545
EfficientNet-B0
10
.796
.685
.736
.882
.679
.811
.625
.519
.574
EfficientNet-B0
50
.809
.667
.752
.845
.625
.752
.601
.487
.593
ResNet-18
3
.886
.832
.705
.841
.664
.732
.633
.531
.538
ResNet-18
10
.872
.774
.807
.843
.658
.784
.619
.512
.568
ResNet-18
50
.855
.667
.879
.822
.616
.791
.595
.479
.586
Cov.
Shift
EfficientNet-B0
3
.285
.335
.319
.876
.733
.750
.596
.481
.492
EfficientNet-B0
10
.655
.520
.507
.883
.724
.804
.578
.458
.521
EfficientNet-B0
50
.510
.251
.537
.852
.673
.809
.553
.427
.543
ResNet-18
3
.668
.661
.351
.838
.718
.737
.589
.474
.485
ResNet-18
10
.672
.667
.667
.857
.703
.780
.571
.451
.514
ResNet-18
50
.670
.667
.667
.855
.654
.796
.546
.421
.526
Table 8: ROAD scores (explanation fidelity) of global models (𝜀=0.5) across three medical imaging datasets for varying FL
client numbers, model architectures and client data distribution patterns. XCal-FL models were trained with a balanced
XCal-FL configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 𝛾= 1). Bold marks the higher (better) score between the two DP methods (FL+DP and XCal-FL)
per configuration. Centralized (non-FL) upper bounds — Melanoma: EfficientNet-B0 = 64.819, ResNet-18 = 66.830; BloodCells:
EfficientNet-B0 = 202.955, ResNet-18 = 200.200; Chest X-rays: EfficientNet-B0 = 407.588, ResNet-18 = 266.563.
Melanoma
BloodCells
ChestXray
Setting
Model
𝑵
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
FL
FL+DP
XCal-FL
IID
EfficientNet-B0
3
24.921
31.272
42.661
283.255
15.561
80.568
187.114
5.742
7.229
EfficientNet-B0
10
26.148
63.584
67.215
271.842
18.274
75.218
192.418
6.184
6.842
EfficientNet-B0
50
23.572
69.813
70.011
258.415
12.584
82.415
178.215
4.518
7.584
ResNet-18
3
27.835
64.192
61.883
268.418
17.842
88.215
168.842
6.415
8.218
ResNet-18
10
25.416
62.748
62.215
279.584
14.218
78.842
175.218
5.218
7.842
ResNet-18
50
28.192
60.584
63.673
254.218
19.584
85.418
162.584
6.842
6.518
Label
Shift
EfficientNet-B0
3
19.284
24.715
40.143
248.572
11.284
62.415
155.218
4.218
5.842
EfficientNet-B0
10
21.538
26.192
41.427
255.218
13.842
58.842
162.842
3.518
6.215
EfficientNet-B0
50
18.415
22.874
33.218
238.415
9.518
65.218
148.415
4.842
4.518
ResNet-18
3
23.142
29.458
36.675
242.184
13.518
72.842
148.584
5.218
6.518
ResNet-18
10
20.875
27.318
42.284
258.415
10.842
68.215
155.215
4.415
5.842
ResNet-18
50
22.418
25.192
37.548
235.842
14.218
64.518
142.842
5.518
5.218
Cov.
Shift
EfficientNet-B0
3
14.582
8.274
6.375
215.842
8.418
48.572
118.584
2.842
4.518
EfficientNet-B0
10
15.218
19.842
15.138
228.415
10.215
52.184
125.218
3.218
3.842
EfficientNet-B0
50
12.874
16.528
17.842
198.584
7.218
44.815
108.415
2.218
4.215
ResNet-18
3
18.415
22.584
10.218
222.518
9.842
55.218
128.215
3.415
3.518
ResNet-18
10
16.842
24.128
35.584
218.184
11.518
48.842
122.842
2.842
4.584
ResNet-18
50
17.218
20.415
31.472
208.415
8.184
52.415
115.518
3.842
5.218
the isolated component variants. This suggests that for the Chest
X-ray dataset, dampening the saliency concentration scaling allows
the model to develop more diffuse but causally relevant attention
patterns, which may be better suited to the grayscale nature and
larger relevant regions characteristic of chest scans. The Amplified
Saliency Concentration configuration (𝛼= 𝛽= 1,𝛾= 2) performed
poorly, achieving the lowest ROAD scores across most noise lev-
els, further indicating that aggressive concentration penalties are
detrimental for this dataset.
The explainability results reveal that the optimal configuration
may be dataset-dependent. For the Blood Cells dataset, the Bal-
anced configuration provided the most consistent explainability
18


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
F1 score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(a) Blood cells
Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
F1 score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(b) Chest X-rays
Figure 7: Ablation analysis of signal component weights on predictive performance (F1 score) across noise levels (𝜀). Each
configuration (Table 5) varies the weights of the logit change (𝛼), counterfactual margin (𝛽), and saliency concentration (𝛾)
components.
improvements, as the three components offer complementary sig-
nals: logit change preserves learning from informative salient re-
gions, counterfactual margin sharpens decision boundaries, and
saliency concentration acts as a regularizer, favoring compact and
interpretable attention patterns. For the Chest X-ray dataset, how-
ever, dampened concentration scaling (𝛾= 0.5) yielded superior
explainability, likely because pneumonia-related features are more
spatially distributed than the localized features in dermoscopic im-
ages. Across all datasets, lower noise levels yielded more confident
and focused models with stronger explainability fidelity.
F
Detailed Complexity Analysis
We performed an execution runtime complexity analysis with re-
spect to our used hardware (a machine with a 64GB of RAM and
a NVIDIA’s RTX 2080 Ti GPU) across all three datasets and our
two evaluated model architectures. Specifically, we measured both
the wall-clock duration of a single client training round and the
incurred overhead relative to the standard client-level DP-SGD
training (with static DP noise).
A standard DP-SGD training step costs approximately 3𝐹+O(𝑃)
per mini-batch, where 𝐹is the cost of a single training-mode for-
ward pass through the model and 𝑃is the total number of model
parameters: one forward pass contributes 𝐹, one backward pass
contributes ≈2𝐹, and batch-level gradient clipping with noise in-
jection adds O(𝑃) [1, 24]. XCal-FL adds an explainability-driven
signal computation per mini-batch, consisting of two inference-
mode forward passes (one on the original input and one on the
masked input), followed by saliency mask operations on the last
convolutional feature map. An inference-mode forward pass, 𝐹inf,
costs approximately 0.5–0.7 × 𝐹since no computation graph is
constructed and no intermediate activations are stored. The per-
step cost of XCal-FL is therefore 3𝐹+ 2 · 𝐹inf + O(𝑃). Notably, no
19


Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0
100
200
300
400
ROAD score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(a) Blood cells
Pure Counterfactual Margin
( =0, =1, =0)
Pure Logit Change
( =1, =0, =0)
Dampened Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =0.5)
Balanced
( =1, =1, =1)
Amplified Saliency Conc.
( =1, =1, =2)
Counterfactual Margin-dominant
( =1, =2, =1)
Logit Change-dominant
( =2, =1, =1)
Configuration
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
ROAD score
Noise level
=0.05
=0.5
=5
=50
(b) Chest X-rays
Figure 8: Ablation analysis of signal component weights on explainability (ROAD score) across noise levels (𝜀). Each configuration
(Table 5) varies the weights of the logit change (𝛼), counterfactual margin (𝛽), and saliency concentration (𝛾) components.
Higher ROAD scores indicate stronger explainability fidelity.
additional backward pass is required for the explainability signal.
This yields a theoretical overhead of 2 · 𝐹inf/(3𝐹+ O(𝑃)).
Figure 9 reports the measured overhead across all configurations.
XCal-FL incurs up to 80% overhead over static DP-SGD depending
on dataset and architecture, which falls within the range of the
theoretical overhead bound and is consistent with previous evalua-
tion studies with FL [6]. AGP [30], which computes channel-level
importance masks via GradCAM (requiring one additional forward
and backward pass per mini-batch), exhibits comparable overhead
in most configurations. The absolute per-round difference between
XCal-FL and AGP is small, typically 1–3 seconds per client, while
XCal-FL yields measurably higher model utility and interpretability
fidelity (Sections 6.1 and 6.2). Practically, this overhead is purely
local and does not increase communication cost, which remains the
dominant bottleneck in cross-silo federated settings where model
transmission over communication links typically requires seconds
to minutes per round. Given the simultaneous gains in accuracy
and explainability, this moderate computational overhead repre-
sents a favorable trade-off for privacy-sensitive applications, such
as clinical imaging.
20


Pushing the (Decision) Boundaries
ResNet-18
EfficientNet-B0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Overhead vs Static DP-SGD (FL+DP) (%)
baseline
13.8s
baseline
12.2s
24.9s
23.9s
22.7s
20.7s
Method
FL+DP (Static DP-SGD)
AGP
XCal-FL (Ours)
(a) Blood cells
ResNet-18
EfficientNet-B0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Overhead vs Static DP-SGD (FL+DP) (%)
baseline
29.4s
baseline
17.6s
47.0s
24.2s
42.9s
28.0s
Method
FL+DP (Static DP-SGD)
AGP
XCal-FL (Ours)
(b) Chest X-rays
ResNet-18
EfficientNet-B0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Overhead vs Static DP-SGD (FL+DP) (%)
baseline
3.9s
baseline
2.4s
5.9s
3.2s
5.7s
2.9s
Method
FL+DP (Static DP-SGD)
AGP
XCal-FL (Ours)
(c) Melanoma
Figure 9: Per-client training overhead (%) relative to standard static DP-SGD, measured across three medical imaging datasets
and two model architectures: ResNet-18 (𝑃=11.7M) and EfficientNet-B0 (𝑃=5.3M). Experiments were conducted on a NVIDIA’s
RTX 2080 Ti GPU machine. Wall-clock per-client times (seconds), averaged over three runs, are annotated above each bar; error
bars denote the standard deviation across rounds.
21
