Title: Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10311v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:09:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 

Fabio Porto 1, Eduardo Ogasawara 2, Gabriela Moraes Botaro 1, Julia Neumann Bastos 1, Augusto Fonseca 1, Esther Pacitti 3, and Patrick Valduriez 1,3 

> 1

LNCC, Petrópolis, Brazil  

> 2

CEFET/RJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil  

> 3

Inria, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, LIRMM, France 

Abstract. Artificial Intelligence (AI) models, encompassing both tra-ditional machine learning (ML) and more advanced approaches such as deep learning and large language models (LLMs), play a central role in modern applications. AI model lifecycle management involves the end-to-end process of managing these models, from data collection and prepara-tion to model building, evaluation, deployment, and continuous monitor-ing. This process is inherently complex, as it requires the coordination of diverse services that manage AI artifacts such as datasets, dataflows, and models, all orchestrated to operate seamlessly. In this context, it is essential to isolate applications from the complexity of interacting with heterogeneous services, datasets, and AI platforms. In this paper, we introduce Gypscie , a cross-platform AI artifact manage-ment system. By providing a unified view of all AI artifacts, the Gypscie platform simplifies the development and deployment of AI applications. This unified view is realized through a knowledge graph that captures application semantics and a rule-based query language that supports rea-soning over data and models. Model lifecycle activities are represented as high-level dataflows that can be scheduled across multiple platforms, such as servers, cloud platforms, or supercomputers. Finally, Gypscie records provenance information about the artifacts it produces, thereby enabling explainability. Our qualitative comparison with representative AI systems shows that Gypscie supports a broader range of functionali-ties across the AI artifact lifecycle. Our experimental evaluation demon-strates that Gypscie can successfully optimize and schedule dataflows on AI platforms from an abstract specification. 

# 1 Introduction 

In modern scientific and operational applications, AI models play a critical role and introduce new challenges for application development and execution. These models include both traditional machine learning (ML) models and more ad-vanced approaches such as deep learning models and large language models (LLMs). Consequently, AI model lifecycle management [22], defined as the pro-cess of building, deploying, and maintaining AI models over time, has become  

> arXiv:2604.10311v1 [cs.AI] 11 Apr 2026 2F. Porto et al.

crucial for reducing the complexity of handling different model services, hetero-geneous datasets, and multiple AI platforms. The AI model lifecycle, often referred to in the literature as the ML model lifecycle [38], typically involves four key stages: 1. Requirements stage : derives the requirements for the model based on the application needs, identifies relevant data sources, and determines the appropriate learning strategy. 2. Data-oriented stage : involves collecting, cleaning, preprocessing, and prepar-ing the data for training the ML model. 3. Model-oriented stage : selects the appropriate AI learning algorithm for the intended task, tunes its hyperparameters, trains it using the preprocessed data, and evaluates its performance according to selected metrics. For LLMs, evaluation also involves assessing whether outputs align with ethical guide-lines and are free from toxic content. 4. Operations stage : deploys the trained model into a production environ-ment, configures it with specific software libraries, and manages the execu-tion strategy, such as centralized or distributed, on demand or continuous. During production, model performance is monitored and flagged as outdated when necessary. During these stages, a wide range of artifacts is produced. Typical ML ar-tifacts include datasets, learners, trained models, model versions, feature sets, dataflows (e.g., ML pipelines), and user functions that provide the desired be-havior for an operation. Additionally, provenance metadata management records both prospective and retrospective information about the use and generation of artifacts. LLMs share core ML artifacts but add new ones reflecting their scale, multi-stage training, and prompt-driven behavior [13]. In addition to massive pretraining corpora and tokenized datasets, they include specialized instruction-tuning and Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) datasets, as well as benchmark collections. Model artifacts include not only base and fine-tuned weights but also distilled models and Mixture-of-Experts variants. Thus, AI artifacts are essential to support AI model lifecycle management, particularly to achieve comparability, traceability, and reproducibility of model and data artifacts across all lifecycle stages [38]. However, managing the wide range of services involved in the artifact lifecycle is a complex task. It requires or-chestrating services across different phases, each operating on distinct artifacts. The execution of these services must be continuously monitored with evaluation and analytical tools. For example, real-time monitoring is essential to provide on-line feedback on training metrics and inference quality. Dataset preparation also poses challenges, as it involves building and executing preprocessing pipelines, handling heterogeneous dataset formats, and selecting appropriate transforma-tion functions [4]. Moreover, the AI model lifecycle is inherently cyclic, since training data can become outdated or concept drift can be detected [19]. In such cases, new versions of both data and models must be generated, which demands systematic management of multiple artifact versions within a continuous process. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 3

A model’s lifecycle generates heterogeneous data that must be systematically managed. First, metadata describe and contextualize the lifecycle of artifacts, including details about the learner used for training, computed metrics, and the datasets employed. These must be stored, often in a relational database, and sup-ported by retrieval and interpretation interfaces. Second, training and inference datasets form another critical class of data. Their types vary with the applica-tion, from time series collected through real-time sensors to tabular data, images, graphs, or token sequences for LLMs. Managed datasets may also enrich predic-tions with domain-specific context, such as vegetation type and altitude in urban environments. Third, to enable explainability, provenance data are captured and stored, often through dedicated mechanisms [15] and graph databases [37]. Fi-nally, predictions themselves constitute another dataset requiring management. Handling and extracting value from this wide spectrum of heterogeneous data remains a major challenge. Furthermore, an application may rely on several candidate models to com-pose a prediction, for example, models based on different architectures trained on the same or similar datasets. The application must identify the appropri-ate candidate models for a given task, invoke them, and interpret the resulting predictions. Some activities may also impose specific demands on the execution platform. For instance, when experimenting with different learners and a small dataset [14], a local system can simplify the training process. When real training data are used, a deep learning model may require a platform with GPUs and suf-ficient VRAM. For a large-scale model with billions of parameters, the cloud or a supercomputer may become the preferred AI platform. For ML inference, scaling according to the number of concurrent requests also determines the size and characteristics of the AI platform. The manual management of AI artifacts within the AI application itself is inefficient, time-consuming, and highly complex. Therefore, AI artifact manage-ment systems have been proposed [38] to support the systematic collection, stor-age, correlation, and management of AI lifecycle artifacts, making them findable, reusable, interpretable, version-controlled, and seamlessly integrated with lifecy-cle services. However, these systems vary considerably in scope. Many remain specialized in particular lifecycle stages, artifact types, or execution ecosystems, which makes it difficult to obtain an integrated view of artifacts and their rela-tionships across the complete AI lifecycle. In contrast, Gypscie is a cross-platform AI artifact management system that unifies AI artifact management across the entire AI model lifecycle. It was devel-oped in the context of scientific domains such as meteorology, drug discovery, and oil and gas exploration. The term Gypscie is a blend of “gypsy” (prediction) and “science”, conveying the idea that the system supports predictions for scientific applications. Gypscie integrates heterogeneous AI platforms across on-premise servers, clusters, and HPC environments. In this paper, we introduce Gypscie and its open, service-based architecture. Gypscie is both a system, providing services for AI artifact management, and a 4 F. Porto et al. 

platform that others can build on or extend. The Gypscie platform simplifies the development and deployment of AI applications by providing a unified view of all AI artifacts. This view is supported by a knowledge graph that captures the application’s semantics and a rule-based query language that allows reasoning about artifacts. Dataflows are high-level representations of data pipelines that move and transform data, typically for training, validation, and deployment of AI models. They can be scheduled to run as jobs on a target AI platform, for instance, as a Scikit-learn processing job on a server, an interactive job on a Spark cluster, or a batch job on a supercomputer. Gypscie keeps track of prove-nance information about the resulting dataflow artifacts, enabling explainability. Finally, by enabling the sharing of different kinds of artifacts, Gypscie fosters scientific collaboration. This paper addresses two main questions: how AI artifacts can be managed in an integrated way across the AI lifecycle in heterogeneous AI platforms, and how abstract AI dataflows can be represented and instantiated across heterogeneous platforms while preserving semantic consistency and enabling optimization. This paper makes three main contributions. First, it presents a cross-platform architecture for integrated AI artifact management across the lifecycle, covering datasets, models, functions, dataflows, and provenance. Second, it introduces a knowledge-graph-based integrated view, supported by a rule-based query lan-guage, to connect artifacts, metadata, domain data, and provenance information. Third, it proposes a high-level dataflow model with cross-platform instantiation and scheduling support, and evaluates this functionality experimentally while assessing the system more broadly through qualitative comparison. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a motivating example from a real-life scientific application. Section 3 describes the Gypscie ar-chitecture. Sections 4, 5, and 6 discuss three major capabilities of Gypscie: model management, knowledge graph, and dataflow processing, respectively. Section 7 provides an extensive evaluation of the Gypscie system. Section 8 reviews related work. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper. 

# 2 Motivating Example 

To illustrate the challenges of AI artifact management in scientific applications, we present a motivating example drawn from the prediction of extreme weather events. This use case also serves as the basis for validating our approach, as discussed in Section 7. Extreme rainfall events are occurring with increasing frequency and intensity worldwide. In Rio de Janeiro, such events have a severe impact every year, including traffic disruptions, landslides, property damage, and even loss of life. To mitigate these impacts, the city of Rio de Janeiro relies on its operations center, the Centro de Operações Rio (COR) 4. COR functions as a citywide data hub, aggregating information on factors such as traffic congestion and weather   

> 4https://cor.rio Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 5

conditions to keep both government officials and citizens informed. It is also responsible for continuous weather monitoring, operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The Rionowcast project at COR, in which we are involved, develops and operates AI models to forecast rainfall up to six hours in advance. However, the precise prediction of rainfall remains extremely challenging because of the chaotic nature of atmospheric phenomena. To address this, the project leverages a wide range of weather data sources, including radar, rain gauges, ocean buoys, radiosondes, and weather stations. Project activities are carried out by data engineers, model developers, and domain scientists, such as meteorologists. Data engineers manage the lifecycle of data-based artifacts. They use histor-ical weather records to build training datasets, retaining only days with rain-fall above a given threshold. Streaming data are continuously captured and fed into the models for inference. Each data source passes through a preprocessing pipeline that cleans, normalizes, and produces curated versions suitable for AI model training and inference. Model developers manage the lifecycle of model-based artifacts. They ex-periment with different learning algorithms, train them on fused datasets that integrate multiple sensor inputs, and evaluate their predictive quality using per-formance metrics. Within the project, we observed that the most suitable fore-casting model can vary depending on the prevailing weather system. This creates the challenge of either selecting a specific model for each system or running mul-tiple models and applying ensemble strategies to produce the final predictions. In addition, model developers may execute training jobs on different compu-tational resources, ranging from on-premise clusters to cloud infrastructures or even supercomputers, which highlights the need for cross-platform support. In Rionowcast, several learning algorithms have been trained under different data fusion configurations. For example, a ConvLSTM spatio-temporal model has been trained to forecast rainfall on a regular 2D grid with approximately 3 km spacing between cells, covering a 17 × 27 km rectangular region of Rio de Janeiro, with a temporal resolution of one hour. The model receives as input a multivariate time series [35], combining precipitation measurements from rain gauges with radar reflectivity data. Figure 1 illustrates the dataflow used to train the ConvLSTM model. In addition, another spatio-temporal model, STConvS2S [11], has been trained using the same data preparation workflow (Figure 1), but adopting a 3D convolutional learning algorithm. Meteorologists monitor rainfall forecasts to issue extreme event alerts, us-ing, for example, the inference dataflow in Figure 2. When a predicted rainfall rate exceeds 50 mm/hour, an alarm is triggered for a potential extreme rainfall event. To validate such alerts, meteorologists review streaming input data and cross-check them against other meteorological observations, such as online radar images. At this stage, they may also query datasets from additional weather sources or consult provenance information on the AI model construction to as-sess the reliability of the observed phenomenon. 6 F. Porto et al.  

> Fig. 1. Dataflow for data preparation and model building

In the Rionowcast project, the Gypscie platform is used to provide data engineers and model developers with a unified view of all AI artifacts across their entire lifecycle, spanning heterogeneous platforms. It also offers meteorologists a high-level, web-based interface to this unified view, supporting both operational needs and scientific validation.  

> Fig. 2. Data preparation for inference dataflow

# 3 Gypscie Architecture 

After providing an overview of the Gypscie platform and the AI artifacts it supports, we describe the platform’s interface and system architecture. Then, we discuss how data management and provenance management are supported. Model management, knowledge graph management, and dataflow processing are described in the subsequent sections. 

3.1 Platform Overview 

The requirements of potential Gypscie users have guided our design choices. Fig-ure 3 provides an overview of the Gypscie platform, highlighting three main user Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 7

roles: domain scientists (e.g., meteorologists) who analyze data using different models, model engineers who build and train models for the domain scientists, and data engineers who provide and maintain the datasets and dataflows for the model engineers. Figure 3 shows the main components of the Gypscie platform from the user’s perspective, namely Gypscie interfaces, the catalog, the knowl-edge graph, external data sources (domain and sensor data), AI applications, and access from the Gypscie core to supercomputers or cloud platforms. The three main user roles are as follows. 1. Model developers . They carry out the model-oriented phase of the AI lifecycle, performing activities such as learner creation, model training, hy-perparameter selection, model import, and model update. Model developers are also involved in combining trained models into ensembles and building new models from existing ones using transfer learning techniques. 2. Data engineers . They are in charge of the data-oriented phase of the AI lifecycle, involving activities such as data search, preprocessing, curation, and storage. They also create dataflows for preprocessing pipelines. Data engi-neers manage data, define dataset schemas, associate them with a project and domain, and oversee storage, favoring data locality for efficient process-ing of dataflows. They also provide model developers with dataset metadata obtained from provenance records. 3. Domain scientists . They perform data analysis and prediction using an AI application’s interface that relies on Gypscie’s API to query data and use models. Through this interface, domain scientists can access predictions, domain knowledge, and provenance information to support their analysis and decision-making.   

> Fig. 3. Overview of the Gypscie Platform 8F. Porto et al.

There is also another user role: the AI engineer. This role monitors model performance in operation, looking for behavioral deviations that may indicate the need to retrain a model with new data. It combines responsibilities of the previously mentioned roles. 

3.2 AI Artifacts 

Gypscie manages the following main AI artifact types: datasets, models, func-tions, and dataflows. These are stored in the catalog as metadata. Datasets, models, and dataflows are qualified according to a given domain, which refers to a specific area of application. For instance, the datasets and models devel-oped in the use case described in Section 2 are qualified under the Meteorology domain. Functions can be shared among domains. For example, a function that implements a specific data imputation algorithm [30] may be useful for dataflows specified in various domains. A Gypscie artifact has a unique Gypscie identifier (GID), which enables ref-erencing it independently of any given context, such as the current host machine. A given artifact may have different versions, each identified by a version number as metadata. The choice of asserting that an artifact is a version of another is left to the user. Each artifact type is defined as follows. 

– Dataset. A dataset is associated with a schema definition describing its attributes and attribute types. The dataset also includes its storage format (e.g., Parquet, H5, Zarr) and its registration date and time. 

– Model. The metadata include the type of task (e.g., classification, regres-sion, clustering), the learning scope (supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, reinforcement learning), the creation date and time, and the dataset used for training. 

– Function. A function implements one of the following behaviors: data trans-formation, model construction, or dataset input or output. Two types are distinguished for input and output: source and sink. A source function reads a stored dataset and creates a version of it in memory, whereas a sink func-tion reads an in-memory dataset and writes it as a stored dataset. Data transformation functions read one or more in-memory datasets and write a single output dataset. A model construction function is referred to as a learner, which reads an in-memory training dataset and produces a stored trained model. 

– Dataflow. Data engineers or model developers implement data processing, training, and inference tasks as dataflows. A dataflow specifies a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of data dependencies between its operator nodes (see Section 6). 

3.3 Platform Interface 

The Gypscie platform offers two interfaces: a web interface and an API. Figure 4 shows the web interface. The web interface provides simple access to all Gyp-scie services, while the API enables the integration of Gypscie services within Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 9 

> Fig. 4. Gypscie Web Interface

more complex applications. For instance, in a meteorology application, front-end pipelines that consume data from different streaming sources can use the Gypscie dataset registration API to register data windows. Then, the meteorology panel used by meteorologists can consume the predictions produced by AI models in Gypscie, using the prediction query API. For more complex services involving multiple data transformations and AI model-related actions, Gypscie offers an interface to create and manage dataflows and functions (see Section 6). Gypscie uses an internal interface to submit dataflows for execution and to retrieve metrics, results, and artifacts. The core module sends a bundle to a target AI platform (e.g., an execution queue in the Santos Dumont supercomputer) containing a JSON materialization of the dataflow specification, the GID of the input datasets, the code for the dataflow functions, and a container with the necessary libraries. 

3.4 System Architecture 

The Gypscie architecture leverages recent advancements in web-oriented archi-tectures. We adopt the following design principles: 

– Ease of use through web interfaces; 

– Service-based interoperability via well-defined APIs; 

– Heterogeneity management through support for multiple AI libraries, learner types, data formats, and data representations; 

– Cross-platform support enabling execution across clusters, supercomputers, and cloud infrastructures; 

– Provenance management to support explainability and reproducibility of tasks; 10 F. Porto et al. 

– Integrated data view provided by a knowledge graph with a rule-based query capability.  

> Fig. 5. Gypscie Architecture

The architecture is divided into two main components, as shown in Figure 5: the core module and the AI platforms module. The core module orchestrates the execution of service requests, including preparation, scheduling, and result retrieval. An AI platform provides the infrastructure that executes requests, such as a server, cluster, supercomputer, or cloud. It consists of hardware for computa-tion and artifact storage, along with the libraries required to run AI tasks. The libraries needed for dataflow functions are provided through containers. Each AI platform is registered in the Gypscie catalog, which makes it available for job scheduling. The AI platform communicates with the core module through an adapter API that unifies the interface between the Gypscie core and the various platforms, ensuring the execution of service requests. For external communication, the core component interacts with Gypscie ap-plications through its service API. This API allows external applications to regis-ter artifacts and service requests in Gypscie and to retrieve the results of executed services. Datasets produced by external sources are registered in Gypscie to obtain a GID and to make them eligible for access by service requests. If a dataset is already stored on a Gypscie AI platform, registration only requires generating a new GID and recording its provenance information. For example, a dataset produced by an application running on the Santos Dumont supercomputer and stored in its file system would only need GID assignment and provenance reg-istration. Conversely, if the dataset is stored on a device that does not belong to a registered AI platform, it must be uploaded to Gypscie during the regis-tration process. A similar procedure applies to models built on an AI platform Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 11 

not registered in Gypscie. In this case, the model is registered using Gypscie’s import service, which assigns the model a GID and follows the same steps as for datasets regarding physical storage and provenance information. To summarize, the main services offered by Gypscie are as follows: 

– Artifact management for registration, metadata and provenance manage-ment, artifact updates, and exclusion operations; 

– Model training to build a model with a learner, an input dataset, a set of hyperparameter values, and an AI platform; 

– Model inference using a trained model, an input dataset, parameter values, and an AI platform to compute predictions; 

– Model import to register a model built outside Gypscie; 

– Query to search the knowledge graph for artifact metadata, domain data, predictions, and provenance information about artifacts and service execu-tion; 

– Data management to organize and store datasets; 

– Dataflow definition, see Section 6, including a list of input dataset GIDs, the names of output datasets, and an AI platform; 

– Automatic scheduling and optimization of dataflows to analyze execution requests and to decide on the AI platform where they should be run; 

– Provenance management to capture, store, and query provenance informa-tion about artifacts. 

3.5 Data Management 

Gypscie manages datasets throughout the lifecycle of AI artifacts. A dataset is a collection of data elements. For instance, a rainfall dataset consists of a set of rainfall recordings. Each element may be of any data type, simple or structured. Thus, a dataset of precipitation time series may contain a list of floating-point values or a set of tuples of measurements including latitude, longitude, precipi-tation, humidity, and pressure. When a dataset is registered, it receives a GID along with a schema describing its attributes. Currently, Gypscie supports the following data storage formats: Parquet, CSV, NetCDF, H5, Zarr, and HDFS. Other formats can be integrated as needed. The files themselves are stored in file systems such as Apache HDFS, Lustre, or Amazon S3, depending on the AI platform. Datasets are stored either in data lakes or file systems, depending on the resources available within a given AI platform. To organize storage, Gypscie structures the data space into three buckets: landing, staging, and curated. 

– The landing bucket contains datasets extracted from their original data sources but not yet processed. For example, a dataset window captured from a meteorological radar is first copied into the landing bucket. 

– The staging bucket stores preprocessed datasets. At this stage, errors may have been corrected and a standard dataset format may have been applied. 12 F. Porto et al. 

– The curated bucket holds datasets that have undergone all necessary pre-processing and are ready to be used in dataflows. For time-series datasets, the curated bucket is further divided into real-time and historical subfold-ers. Real-time datasets are used directly as inputs to real-time inference dataflows, whereas historical datasets are preserved as training data. Gypscie prioritizes data locality, storing datasets within the AI platform’s native file system where they were created. It also provides a default AI platform to store datasets originating from external data sources registered in Gypscie. The placement of a dataset significantly affects job execution performance. When a dataflow execution request is submitted to Gypscie, it specifies the input datasets required for processing the corresponding job. The job scheduler then selects the AI platform on which to execute the job and allocates the correspond-ing datasets. In some cases, datasets must be copied from their storage platform to the platform where the job is scheduled to run, which introduces performance overhead. To mitigate this, the Data Management service periodically analyzes dataset access patterns to predict the most likely platform from which a dataset will be accessed. Based on this analysis, it may proactively replicate the dataset to the target platform. Gypscie also manages dataset versions across platforms, removing redundant copies when they are no longer accessed locally. 

3.6 Provenance Management 

Gypscie implements services to capture, store, and query provenance information about its artifacts and their roles in dataflow execution. Provenance information encompasses both prospective provenance, structured in the platform catalog, and retrospective provenance, which is generated during dataflow execution. In prospective provenance, metadata about dataflows, functions, learners, datasets, and models are recorded. In retrospective provenance, three types of records are distinguished, artifact generation, training metrics, and user-defined records [5]. Provenance metadata enable the reproducibility of experiments, support dataflow optimization, and contribute to prediction explainability and automatic model selection. Datasets serve as both inputs and outputs of dataflow operations. The prove-nance of every dataset registered in Gypscie is recorded in the system’s prove-nance database. For datasets originating from external systems, their source description is stored as provenance information. For datasets produced by Gyp-scie dataflow operations, the provenance includes references to the dataflow, the operation, the function, and the input datasets used in their creation. During artifact generation, Gypscie leverages MLflow to retrieve results and associate them with the functions responsible for their production. Training met-rics are automatically captured via Autolog, an MLflow feature, with values recorded at each epoch and sent to the Gypscie Provenance Manager to update the provenance database. User-defined records, such as variable statistics (e.g., mean and standard deviation), can be added through configurable hooks in dataflow nodes; see Sec-tion 6. These records are exported in JSON, stored in the MLflow server, and Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 13 

later integrated into the Gypscie catalog. Provenance metadata are stored in the platform catalog, which has been extended to support provenance records. Additionally, datasets stored in AI platforms are referenced by retrospective provenance metadata as part of the provenance artifacts. Finally, a provenance graph, implemented according to the W3C PROV stan-dard [32], can be generated upon request by a domain scientist or through the Gypscie API. 

# 4 Model Management 

Model management plays a vital role throughout the AI lifecycle. It supports activities in both the model-centric and operational phases and indirectly in-fluences the data-centric stage [38]. Building a model is an inherently iterative process [23], involving tasks such as preparing input datasets, configuring hyper-parameters, selecting learning algorithms, defining the scope of the learning task (e.g., supervised or unsupervised), choosing the AI training tools, and scheduling data pipelines on the AI platform. Not every activity must be repeated in each iteration. For instance, a model engineer may reuse existing artifacts while only adjusting hyperparameters for a new training run. In this section, we describe how Gypscie supports model management activ-ities, including learner management, versioning, training, inference, and model selection. 

4.1 Learners 

In Gypscie, the learner is a central artifact in model training. Implemented in Python, it encapsulates key design decisions such as the choice of learning algorithm, model architecture, expected input data format, criteria for splitting data into training, validation, and test sets, and the metrics used to evaluate model quality. The learner serves as both a reusable component and the primary unit for attaching provenance information. 

4.2 Model Versions 

Managing AI models involves handling various model versions and copies. Given a model, the model manager creates a new model version when one of the fol-lowing conditions occurs: 

– Hyperparameters are adjusted (e.g., learning rate, batch size, or number of trees). 

– The training dataset is updated (with more data, cleaner data, or rebalanced data). 

– The training process changes (e.g., number of epochs or optimization set-tings), while the underlying architecture or algorithm remains the same. 

– Minor code refactors are performed without altering the model’s structure or learning paradigm. 14 F. Porto et al. 

Managing different model versions prevents unwanted impacts on applica-tions, such as recompilation, when a new version is deployed. The model de-veloper may also decide to discard a specific version, which has no effect on applications. The management of model copies is distinct. A model copy corre-sponds to the same model artifact stored on more than one AI platform. The model manager maintains multiple copies to enhance data locality during infer-ence pipeline scheduling. Conversely, a copy is discarded when it is no longer useful for scheduled pipelines. In contrast to a model version, a new model is built when one of the following conditions is observed: 

– The learning algorithm changes (e.g., switching from random forest to ex-treme gradient boosting, or from long short-term memory (LSTM) to trans-former). 

– The model architecture changes in a way that alters its inductive bias (e.g., modifying the number or type of layers in a neural network or adding atten-tion mechanisms). 

– The problem definition changes (e.g., from regression to classification, with different target variables or input features). 

– The task or domain changes (e.g., from rainfall forecasting to traffic fore-casting). These activities, including producing a new model version or building a new model, are supported by Gypscie’s training service. A model training request can be issued by an external component of the Gypscie platform through its service API or directly by a domain scientist via the web user interface. In both cases, the request is forwarded to the model manager, which then communicates with the Gypscie core run manager, the component responsible for submitting jobs to the selected AI platform. Once the training job has been completed, the model manager uses the job ID and training logs to update the Gypscie catalog. The job ID is also passed to the provenance manager to retrieve provenance metadata, including model metrics. The resulting model artifact is stored in the local storage of the AI platform used for training, and its location is recorded in the logs and updated in the Gypscie catalog. Figure 6 depicts an MLflow page that enables the online monitoring of the training process. For long-running training processes, it is essential to monitor progress, allowing for the interruption of the process if the performance does not converge. After the model artifact has been generated, it becomes available for execu-tion in inference tasks. 

4.3 Model Inference 

Model inference involves selecting a model artifact, an input dataset format-ted according to the model’s expected input, and an AI platform. The model manager handles the inference request by interfacing with the run manager to execute the inference pipeline and by updating the catalog with metadata about the resulting prediction file. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 15  

> Fig. 6. MLflow online training loss

4.4 Model Selection 

Model selection enables users to search for model artifacts of interest for in-ference. Searches can be performed based on various criteria, such as scientific domain or subdomain, metadata, format, tools, and keywords. This capability relies on the artifact catalog. A key functionality of the Gypscie model manager is the automatic selec-tion of models for a given prediction task. Automatic model selection addresses the problem of identifying the optimal model from a set of existing models de-signed for the same task. These models may represent different versions of the same model or entirely different models. Gypscie provides extensible system-level support for model selection within a broader cross-platform AI artifact management architecture, allowing different selection strategies to be integrated with artifact metadata and provenance management. To address this task, the model manager uses the DJEnsemble selection algorithm [36]. The intuition be-hind DJEnsemble is to rank models according to the similarity between the data used during their training and the input data provided for inference. This approach leverages the provenance information maintained by Gypscie for all trained models. In addition, DJEnsemble evaluates each model’s generalization ability through a meta-learning function. In the spatio-temporal context of Ri-onowcast predictions, the model selection procedure is combined with a spatial allocation strategy, following the approach described in DJEnsemble. In AI systems, managing different artifacts, such as models and data, and their metadata requires an integrated data view. The next section describes the knowledge graph integration approach. 16 F. Porto et al. 

# 5 Knowledge Graph 

In this section, we provide a detailed description of our knowledge graph ap-proach. A knowledge graph [20] provides a flexible and semantically rich way to inte-grate heterogeneous data sources by representing entities and their relationships in a unified graph structure. Unlike rigid schema-based integration approaches, knowledge graphs can naturally accommodate diverse formats, evolving schemas, and complex interconnections. By embedding semantic meaning through ontolo-gies and linked vocabularies, they enable more accurate data alignment, support reasoning across data sources, and improve discoverability. This makes them particularly effective for integrating siloed or rapidly changing data in complex domains such as science, where context and relationships are as important as the data itself. In Gypscie, we adopt a knowledge graph approach to provide an integrated view of the data and metadata needed by AI applications. The data consid-ered for integration include historical training data, domain static data, online streaming data, observations, predictions computed by AI models, and prove-nance data. The knowledge graph exposes to AI applications the data and rela-tionships that are otherwise hidden within the different data sources managed by Gypscie. It includes managed artifacts such as datasets, models, learners, functions, and dataflows, as well as execution and provenance entities such as model runs, transformation runs, and dataflow runs. The graph captures rela-tions such as artifact usage, input and output dependencies, domain qualifica-tion, and provenance links between produced artifacts and the operations that generated them. Rule-based reasoning extends this explicit graph with derived relationships, enabling the system to expose not only stored metadata but also inferred connections between artifacts and executions. Figure 7 shows a graphical representation of a fragment of the Gypscie knowl-edge graph for the meteorology use case described in Section 2. We can identify nodes representing managed artifacts such as models, learners, datasets, and dataflows. Provenance information includes model training records and errors, model runs representing inference executions, transformation runs, and dataflow runs. The graph also includes datasets containing input time series for model prediction, as well as time series generated by the inference process. A knowledge graph can be queried using graph-based languages such as SPARQL (for RDF data) or Cypher (for graph databases). In Gypscie, we also need to manipulate complex domain knowledge, which is ubiquitous in scientific areas such as physics, medicine, and meteorology. Therefore, the query language must also enable the expression of domain knowledge to extend the information obtained from the available data. This knowledge semantics can be naturally captured by a rule-based language grounded in first-order logic, such as Data-log. In Gypscie, we adopt the approach used in InteGraal [3], a tool for integrating heterogeneous data sources using Datalog conjunctive queries. The combination of a knowledge graph with a rule-based language provides several advantages [31]: Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 17 

Fig. 7. Gypscie Knowledge Graph 

a unified representation for expressing queries and dataflows, the ability to define domain rules as extensions of domain knowledge, and cost-based optimization of queries and dataflows. In this setting, the explicit graph structure provides the base relations, whereas Datalog rules define derived predicates that capture higher-level semantics needed by AI applications. The code snippet in Listing 1.1 illustrates rules specified in the InteGraal knowledge base integration system [3]. Rules in InteGraal extend the Global as View integration approach with existential semantics defined over the integrated view. The existential semantics enables the definition of concepts that do not exist in the integrated view. Consequently, a domain scientist can write queries on the knowledge base that reason over these defined rules. In Listing 1.1, the 

is_activity predicate generalizes the different processes executed in Gypscie. The transitivity rule navigates through input and output relationships to produce the transitive closure of dataset transformations. 

Listing 1.1. Example of rules in InteGraal                

> is_activity ( IDMR ): -model_run ( IDMR ). is_activity ( IDMT ): -model_training ( IDMT ). is_activity ( IDTR ): -trans_run ( IDTR ). %Transitivity transformation ( IDDSI , Name , IDDSO ) : -has_input ( IDTR , IDDSI ) , uses ( IDTR , IDTF ) , has_name ( IDTF , Name ) , has_output ( IDDSO , IDTR ) , dataSet ( IDDSO ). transformation (X , ig : concat ( W1 , ig : concat (" +" , W2 )) , Z ) : -transformation (X , W1 ,Y ) , transformation (Y , W2 , Z ).

This formalization is particularly useful in Gypscie because it connects lifecy-cle management with semantic querying. For example, the same integrated view can be used to retrieve the datasets and models involved in a prediction, to trace 18 F. Porto et al. 

transformation chains through provenance relations, or to support optimization decisions based on artifact dependencies. 

# 6 Dataflow Management 

Dataflows are high-level representations of data pipelines that automatically move and transform data from their sources to where they are needed. They are typically used for data collection, data cleaning and preprocessing, feature engineering, data validation, and data transformation. They are critical because raw data from real-world systems are rarely clean or ready to be used directly by an AI algorithm. A dataflow ensures that data flows reliably and consis-tently through every preparation stage. We distinguish three levels of dataflow representation: abstract dataflows, concrete dataflows, and data pipelines. 

– An abstract dataflow defines a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of dependencies among operations applied to dataset placeholders. 

– A concrete dataflow instantiates an abstract dataflow by binding it to spe-cific datasets as inputs and outputs and by providing the parameter values required for execution. 

– A data pipeline refers to a concrete dataflow in execution as a job running on a given AI platform. In this section, we describe our high-level dataflow language and our approach to dataflow processing and optimization. 

6.1 Dataflow Language 

Our dataflow language represents data transformations as a DAG. It is designed to achieve the following goals: enable automatic optimization, provide explain-ability for dataflow outcomes, express services spanning the complete AI lifecycle, and execute dataflows on different AI platforms. To enable automatic optimization, we consider dataflow nodes associated with operators that have well-defined data transformation semantics, such as filter, join, or train. The metadata of these nodes are further enriched during dataflow execution with provenance information whose logs describe the exe-cution behavior of each operator, thereby supporting cost-based optimization. Furthermore, the provenance data captured during operator execution provide information about dataset transformations, thus enabling explainability of exe-cuted processes. Representing a dataflow as a DAG enables diverse compositions of operations. The behavior of each operation is defined by an associated user-defined Python function that specifies the expected behavior of the operator within the dataflow. This compositional flexibility supports the definition of diverse services across the AI lifecycle. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 19 

The transformation from an abstract to a concrete representation for dataflow execution adapts the operator code to the language used by the target AI plat-form on which the dataflow will run. Examples of such execution frameworks include Apache Spark, PyTorch, TensorFlow, and Velox. Figure 8 shows a UML representation of the dataflow language data model. An artifact is a generic concept that represents data, processes, and dataflows. Each artifact object is identified by a unique GID, as described in Section 3.  

> Fig. 8. Dataflow language data model

Dataflow nodes are associated with operators that specify their semantics in one of three categories: data access, transformation, and model training. Data access operators are of the form DA = {sink, source }. A source operator reads an input file (i.e., a physical dataset) and produces a copy of its content in memory (i.e., an in-memory dataset). Conversely, a sink operator stores an in-memory dataset in persistent storage. A transformation is an operation that processes input in-memory datasets and produces an output in-memory dataset. The execution behavior of a trans-formation operator includes its input–output dataset cardinality, denoting the number of datasets that are input to and output by the operator. It also specifies whether it processes each dataset element one at a time or assumes a set-at-a-time behavior. For example, the M ap (dataset in, dataset out, f unction f ) oper-ator implements element-at-a-time behavior, whereas the GroupBy (dataset in, dataset out, attribute _list param ) operator implements set-at-a-time behavior. The Process type in Figure 8 generalizes the function object that defines the processing behavior of operators. A Transformation Process operator is associ-20 F. Porto et al. 

ated with a Function process implemented in a programming language such as Python. The semantics of operators regarding set-at-a-time versus one-element-at-a-time processing restrict the type of functions compatible with them. The 

Model Training operator is of type Process Operator . Examples of Model Train-ing operators are M T = {train, f it }. The Process used in model training is of type Learner . The latter refers to code in a programming language (e.g., Python) that implements a learning strategy and produces an output model artifact. Fi-nally, a Model Process operator is associated with Transformation operators 

M o = {P redict, Inf er, . . . }, which receive input data and compute inference results as output. Listing 1.2 shows an abstract dataflow for the Rionowcast inference use case, corresponding to the dataflow definition in Figure 2, with a few simplifications. The function implementations are not included. Such a definition is used in sev-eral concrete dataflows. When specifying a concrete dataflow, input and output datasets are associated with the corresponding sink and source operators, and function parameters are assigned values. A concrete dataflow is then scheduled to run as a pipeline on a specific AI platform. 

Listing 1.2. Abstract dataflow for the Rionowcast inference use case   

> graph_data =[{" GID " : " hash_id " , " description " : " Rion owcas t_inf erenc e " } , {" operator " : " source " , " function_alias " : " r i o n o w c a s t _ i n f e r e n c e _ l o a d _ d a t a " , " input " :[ " radar_data_path " , " r ain_g auge_d ata_p ath " , " grid_data_path " ] , " output " :[ " df_radar " , " df_rain_gauge " , " df_grid " ] , } , {" operator " : " source " , " function_alias " : " r i o n o w c a s t _ i n f e r e n c e _ l o a d _ m o d e l " , " input " :[ " model_path " ] , " output " :[ " model " ] , } , {" operator " : " Join " , " function_alias " : " r i o n o w c a s t _ i n f e r e n c e _ p r e p r o c e s s i n g " , " input " :[ " df_radar " , " df_rain_gauge " , " df_grid " ] , " output " :[ " X " ] , } , {" operator " : " predict " , " function_alias " : " r i o n o w c a s t _ i n f e r e n c e _ p r e d i c t " , " input " :[ " X " ,

Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 21  

> " model " , ] , " output " :[ " output " ] , } , {" operator " : " sink " , " function_alias " : " r i o n o w c a s t _ i n f e r e n c e _ s a v e " , " input " :[ " output " , " output_path " ] , " output " : None , }]

Since an operator may consume more than one dataset, we need to disam-biguate the pair that establishes the producer–consumer relationship between two nodes. This relationship is represented by the pairing of dataset connectors, each corresponding to a specific input or output dataset. We consider two types of functions, θ and λ. θ functions are transformation functions. They may receive a single tuple as input and produce a single tuple as output. Transformation functions may also behave as aggregate functions, receiving a set of tuples as input and producing a single output tuple. λ functions implement model training, receiving a set of tuples as input and producing a model and an output tuple with metric values. Figure 9 complements Figure 8 by focusing on the definition of two types of transformation functions that operate on either single input tuples or sets of input tuples. The figure also shows the Model Training function (i.e., a learner), which receives an in-memory dataset as input and generates a model artifact and a tuple of training metrics. Finally, a concrete dataflow associates the GIDs of each input dataset with the input connectors of the source operators. 

Fig. 9. Function data model 

6.2 Dataflow Processing 

Dataflow processing in Gypscie includes dataflow rewriting, scheduling, and ex-ecution. At a high level, given an abstract dataflow D, a set of fragments F22 F. Porto et al. 

derived from D, and a set of available AI platforms P , the scheduling problem can be viewed as finding an assignment A : F → P that minimizes the total cost of executing and transferring dataflow fragments while satisfying platform constraints such as data locality, execution compatibility, and GPU availability. This objective can be expressed as follows: 

Cost( D, A ) = X 

> f∈F

execution _cost( f, A (f )) + X 

> (fi,f j)

transfer _cost( fi, f j , A )

where the first term captures fragment execution cost on the assigned platform and the second term captures the cost of moving data between dependent frag-ments assigned to different platforms. In Gypscie, this objective is approached heuristically, with provenance information providing the basis for cost and se-lectivity estimation. In practice, Gypscie approaches this objective in two main steps: dataflow rewriting, which improves the execution plan using operator se-mantics, and platform-aware scheduling, which assigns the resulting fragments to target AI platforms. Dataflow rewriting involves ordering operators in the dataflow using a strat-egy inspired by [34]. We leverage the semantics introduced by operators at each node to evaluate rewriting rules that modify their positions in the DAG. For example, a filter operator can be pushed as close as possible to the source opera-tors that produce the data it filters. We adopt the predicate migration technique, applied to expensive predicates in SQL queries [18], to generalize the movement of operator nodes. This technique computes a rank for operations based on the ratio between operator selectivity and cost. Higher-ranked operators are placed as early as possible in the graph path. We use provenance records as the basis for selectivity and cost estimation. For performance or data privacy reasons, a dataflow in Gypscie may have to be executed on different AI platforms. For example, data transformations may occur in a cluster where the data are stored, while model training may take place on a supercomputer. Thus, we introduce the concept of a dataflow fragment as a unit of scheduling for a registered AI platform. We define a dataflow fragment as a connected subgraph of a dataflow that starts at a source operator and ends at a sink operator, along with their corresponding input and output files. Dataflow scheduling involves splitting the dataflow into fragments, introduc-ing data transfer fragments, and assigning each fragment to an AI platform. Con-sider, for instance, the dataflow shown in Figure 1. Suppose the input datasets, radar, rain gauge, and grid files, are stored in a Spark CPU-based cluster. The preprocessing operations to build a training dataset can exploit data locality by executing on the Spark cluster. Because of the large size of the fused dataset resulting from preprocessing the three files, the training step can be scheduled to run on a supercomputer AI platform equipped with multiple GPUs. The ex-ecution plan would therefore split the dataflow into three fragments, as shown in Figure 10. Fragment (a) includes all operators from reading the input files to executing preprocessing steps and storing the fused dataset. Fragment (b) implements the transfer of the fused dataset to the supercomputer file system. Finally, fragment (c) contains the training operation. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 23  

> Fig. 10. Dataflow split into fragments

This complex activity is typically performed manually by the dataflow devel-oper, which is error-prone and suboptimal. In Gypscie, we automate this process using a scheduling approach that prioritizes data locality for data preprocessing and model inference and GPU availability for model training. The computation of dataflow fragments proceeds as follows. It starts by analyzing the dataflow graph and marking nodes with operator types source and train . For the for-mer, we identify the current storage location for each input dataset. We then traverse the graph from the dataset source operation forward, following the di-rection of the graph edges, until a data transfer is required or a sink operation is reached. The fragment of the graph produced up to that point is annotated with the corresponding dataset location and AI platform. Operations requiring data transfer are either binary operators, which associate fragments from different AI platforms, or the train operator. In this process, the operator semantics intro-duced earlier, together with the distinction between transformation functions θ

and training functions λ, provide the formal basis for reasoning about fragment boundaries, execution requirements, and platform suitability. If a binary operator is found, three options are possible: execute the binary operator at the site of one of the input fragments, at the site of the next binary operator, or at the train operator site. This choice considers dataset transfer costs, using provenance information for cost-based decisions. The train operator is scheduled on a GPU-equipped AI platform and annotated with the number of GPUs to be used during model training. Suppose the input fragment assigned to the train operator is already located on an AI platform satisfying the GPU requirements. In that case, the input fragment is extended to include the train 24 F. Porto et al. 

operator. Otherwise, the latter is assigned to the AI platform with GPU units that best match the requirements. In this case, a dataset transfer fragment is added to the schedule, which performs the data copy from the input fragment site to the training site. Data transfer operations use the RDMA protocol [41] to copy datasets between AI platforms without staging large datasets to disk. Thus, transfer operation nodes are split between the input fragment and the fragment at the transfer destination site. Finally, the output of dataflow optimization is the dataflow execution graph split into fragments and annotated with the assigned AI platforms. Next, the AI platform dataflow adaptation rewrites the graph into a specification supported by the target AI platform. We currently support execution in Apache Spark, Kedro, Parsl, and the AI engines TensorFlow, PyTorch, and Scikit-learn. The mapping procedure is inspired by the Apache Wayang project [8]. Finally, the mapped code is scheduled for execution as a set of data pipelines to be run as jobs on the designated AI platforms, according to the data dependencies specified by the dataflow execution graph. 

# 7 System Evaluation 

In this section, we provide a thorough evaluation of the Gypscie system. We evaluate Gypscie at two complementary levels: functional scope through qual-itative comparison with representative AI systems, and operational behavior through an experimental assessment of its dataflow instantiation and schedul-ing functionality. Section 7.1 provides a qualitative comparison of Gypscie with representative AI systems, focusing on model lifecycle management. Section 7.2 gives our experimental evaluation. 

7.1 Qualitative Evaluation 

Several systems have been proposed to support different aspects of the AI model lifecycle. ML platforms such as MLflow [12] and Kubeflow [26] provide experi-ment tracking and pipeline orchestration capabilities, while tools like lakeFS [28] focus on dataset versioning. Academic systems such as KeystoneML [40], Helix [45], and SystemDS [6] address scalable pipeline execution and optimization of iterative workflows, whereas ModelDB [42] concentrates on ML model lifecycle management. The systems included in this comparison were selected as repre-sentative industrial and academic approaches that cover functionalities closely related to Gypscie’s scope, such as experiment tracking, dataflow orchestration, model lifecycle support, and dataset management. The comparison dimensions were defined from the AI artifact management capabilities discussed through-out this paper. In the tables, Yes or Full indicates direct support as a central capability, Partial or Limited indicates restricted or indirect support, and No 

indicates that the capability is not explicitly provided. In contrast, Gypscie em-ploys an artifact-centric architecture that unifies the management of datasets, models, and dataflows within a single system. Data, metadata, and monitoring Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 25 

information are further consolidated into a knowledge graph, enabling explicit provenance modeling and rich semantic querying throughout the AI lifecycle. This design provides a cohesive, transparent, and explainable view of AI arti-facts and their dependencies across heterogeneous AI platforms. 

Table 1. Gypscie versus industrial AI systems Gypscie MLflow Kubeflow LakeFS Primary abstraction Artifact graph Experiments Kubeflow pipelines Data versions Artifact-centric lifecycle model Yes Partial No Data-centric Knowledge-graph representation Yes No No No Explicit provenance modeling Yes Limited Partial Dataset lineage Lifecycle coverage Full Partial Full Data-only Dataflow modeling Abs./Conc. Declarative Concrete No Model management Yes Yes Ecosystem 1 No Data versioning Limited Limited External 2 Core AI platforms Multi 3 Local/Cloud Kubernetes clusters Storage 4

Cross-platform orchestration Yes Limited No Storage-level Optimization of ML dataflows Limited No Limited No Automatic selection of models Limited No No No Integration with AI ecosystem Yes Yes Yes Yes  

> 1

Via ecosystem tools. 2 Requires external tools for data versioning. 3 HPC, Spark clusters, and cloud environments. 4 Storage-layer integration, e.g., S3 or GCS. 

Table 1 situates Gypscie relative to major AI systems in industry. Gyp-scie offers a comprehensive set of functionalities for managing the full lifecycle of AI artifacts. While MLflow is extensively used in industry and is also inte-grated within Gypscie, its primary focus on experiment tracking limits its ability to address higher-level requirements, such as knowledge graph integration and dataflow optimization. Kubeflow is designed to support ML dataflows on Kubernetes infrastruc-tures. While it provides mechanisms for orchestrating pipeline execution, it does not support knowledge graph representations and offers limited functionality for pipeline optimization. In addition, it does not directly address data management concerns and requires a Kubernetes cluster to execute pipelines. 26 F. Porto et al. 

Finally, lakeFS provides an effective solution for versioning datasets by adopt-ing a Git-like version control model for data stored in data lakes. Although it offers powerful capabilities for dataset evolution and reproducibility, its scope is limited to the data layer and does not encompass the full lifecycle management of ML artifacts. These comparisons highlight three distinctions of Gypscie with respect to representative industrial systems: broader lifecycle coverage, tighter integration between artifacts, provenance, and semantic querying, and support for cross-platform dataflow instantiation beyond a single execution platform. 

Table 2. Gypscie versus academic AI systems Gypscie Key-stoneML Helix ModelDB SystemDS Primary abstraction Artifact graph ML pipelines ML pipelines Model-s/runs DS workflows Artifact-centric lifecycle model Yes No Partial Yes No Knowledge-graph representation Yes No No No No Explicit provenance modeling Full Limited Partial Yes Low 1

Lifecycle coverage Full Partial Partial Model-focused Full Dataflow modeling Abs./Conc. Pipeline DSL Keystone DSL Limited Scripts 2

Model management Yes Limited Limited Core Limited Data versioning Limited Limited Limited Limited Limited Execution environments Multi 3 Spark Clusters Local Local/S-park Cross-platform orchestration Yes Spark-centric Limited No No Optimization of ML dataflows Limited Yes Yes No Yes Automatic selection of models Limited No No No Limited Integration with ecosystem Yes Limited Limited Limited API 41 Low-granularity lineage. 2 R and Python scripts. 3 HPC, Spark clusters, and cloud environments. 4 Java and Python API. 

Table 2 positions Gypscie with respect to important academic AI systems. KeystoneML and Helix were designed to optimize ML pipelines executed on Apache Spark. Similarly, Apache SystemDS extends the earlier Apache Sys-temML implementation [10], incorporating lessons learned from data science workloads. The Apache SystemDS project focuses on providing a declarative Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 27 

abstraction layer for data science, combined with low-level runtime optimiza-tions for efficient execution. To support data locality and scalability, data can be distributed and managed across different storage infrastructures, including HPC distributed file systems, cloud storage services, or local storage. Finally, Gypscie supports applications built on top of its artifacts and metadata. To facilitate this integration, it pro-vides a unified data view through a knowledge graph that enables structured ac-cess to artifacts and their relationships. Relative to these academic systems, Gyp-scie is less focused on optimizing a single execution stack and more focused on combining artifact-centric lifecycle management, provenance, and cross-platform execution within the same architecture. This distinction is important because the goal of Gypscie is not only to execute pipelines efficiently, but also to manage the broader set of artifacts and relations involved in AI applications. 

7.2 Experimental Evaluation 

A major functionality of Gypscie is the ability to define abstract dataflows that can be optimized and scheduled as concrete dataflows across multiple platforms. The purpose of this experimental evaluation is not to validate every capabil-ity of Gypscie empirically, which would be impractical, but to assess a central mechanism of the system: the instantiation and execution of abstract dataflows on heterogeneous platforms. In this section, we evaluate such functionality with experiments based on the use-case dataflow depicted in Figure 2. More specifi-cally, the experiments pursue three complementary goals: to verify that the same abstract dataflow can be materialized on distinct AI platforms, to compare the performance behavior of two concrete instantiation of that dataflow, and to as-sess the impact of a simple rewriting strategy on execution cost. The experiments therefore compare a Pandas-based execution on a server and a Spark-based exe-cution on a cluster as two concrete instantiations of the same abstract dataflow. In this context, semantic consistency means that both instantiations preserve the same abstract operators, input-output structure, and expected processing semantics defined in the original dataflow specification. In the rest of this sec-tion, we describe our experimental environment and methodology and analyze the experimental results. 

Experimental Environment. The experimental evaluation consists of a com-parative analysis of execution time and RAM memory consumption between the two approaches (Pandas and Spark) to highlight performance and scalability differences. The experimental setup is as follows: 

– The data are HDF-format files, with individual sizes ranging from 6 MB to 9 MB, generated every five minutes, totaling 288 files per day and approxi-mately 5.2 × 10 8 records daily. 

– The experiments were conducted on a single dedicated host equipped with two Intel Xeon Silver 4216 processors, totaling two physical sockets, with a base frequency of 2.10 GHz. The system features 128 GB of DDR4 RAM 28 F. Porto et al. 

(nominal frequency of 3200 MT/s, operating at 2400 MT/s) and a 1 TB NVMe SSD (Kioxia model KXG80ZNV1T02), used for both execution and data storage. 

– The distributed environment was provisioned using Docker containers on a Hadoop YARN-based cluster with one NameNode, one ResourceManager, two DataNodes, and two NodeManagers. Each NodeManager was configured with 25 vCores and approximately 51 GB of memory (52224 MB), with a maximum container allocation of 14 GB and a minimum of 1 GB. 

– Spark was configured using 8 executors, each with 4 cores and 6 GB of memory, along with an additional 4 GB of memory overhead. The driver was configured with 2 cores and 6 GB of memory (plus 2 GB of overhead), and the shuffle parallelism was set to 96 partitions. 

– Gypscie was deployed using Docker containers, ensuring the isolation, re-producibility, and consistency of the experimental environment across all executions. 

Experimental Methodology. The experiments were performed following a controlled methodology, in which the host is kept under exclusive use through-out execution in order to minimize external interference and ensure measurement consistency. Seven data samples were considered, consisting of 10 , 20 , . . . , 70 

weather radar files, representing different input sizes. Each sample was processed five times using both dataflow implementation approaches (Pandas and Spark) and the average and standard deviation of the execution time was computed for each configuration. For Pandas, the behavior of RAM memory consumption was evaluated as data size increases. This analysis is intended to characterize a concrete bottle-neck of the Pandas-based instantiation in the studied scenario, rather than to provide a directly symmetric memory comparison between the two execution technologies. We did not perform such analysis for Spark, as it provides built-in mechanisms for memory management and optimization. In addition to the main comparison between Pandas and Spark, we also include an illustrative optimiza-tion case study. Finally, the sample composed of 70 files was reprocessed using an optimized version of the dataflow, in which the filtering dataflow graph node was moved earlier in the pipeline to reduce the size of data processed earlier, thereby improving efficiency in terms of both memory usage and execution time. We implemented the functions for each dataflow graph node operator in Python, using the native functionality of the respective technologies (Pandas and Spark). Each implemented function adheres to the operations defined in the abstract dataflow and to the specified input and output data structures, ensuring semantic consistency across executions and alignment with the abstract specification of the use-case dataflow. 

Experimental Results. In this section, we first compare the execution times of the use-case dataflow implemented with the Pandas and Spark approaches, then Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 29 

analyze RAM memory consumption for the Pandas approach, and finally discuss how a simple rewriting strategy affects the cost of one concrete materialization. Figure 11 shows the average execution time and standard deviation for Pan-das and Spark as the data size increases, with significant differences in perfor-mance behavior. For the data sample of size 10, both approaches exhibit higher variability in execution time, reflected by a larger standard deviation. Such be-havior is explained by the presence of an initial overhead associated with the first execution, related to the setup of the Conda environment, which does not occur in subsequent runs and therefore does not affect the remaining samples. From the following data samples onward, execution times become highly sta-ble, with low variability, indicating consistency in the measurements. In terms of scalability, the Pandas approach shows an approximately linear increase in execution time as the sample size grows, highlighting its limitations in han-dling larger data sizes. In contrast, the Spark approach maintains relatively constant execution times across different samples, demonstrating superior scal-ability and efficiency in distributed processing. These results reinforce the suit-ability of each technology for different data sizes and performance requirements. From the standpoint of Gypscie, this result is important because it shows that cross-platform instantiation is not merely a portability feature. Different con-crete instantiations of the same abstract dataflow can exhibit markedly different operational behavior, which justifies platform-aware scheduling.   

> Fig. 11. Average execution time and standard deviation for Pandas and Spark as a function of the sample size, i.e., the number of radar files with volumes ranging from 6 MB to 9 MB. 30 F. Porto et al.

Figure 12 provides a complementary view of the results by considering only the fifth execution of each sample, since execution times become consistent after the initial stabilization phase. Thus, the analysis focuses on the approximate absolute execution time, expressed in minutes, providing a direct comparison of computational cost between the approaches. These results further highlight the scalability difference between the two ap-proaches. While Pandas is suitable for smaller data sizes, Spark delivers superior and more stable performance in larger-scale scenarios, even when considering ab-solute execution time.  

> Fig. 12. Total execution time (in minutes) per sample, considering the fifth run, for Pandas and Spark. The sample size corresponds to the number of radar files with volumes ranging from 6 MB to 9 MB.

The analysis of RAM memory consumption for the Pandas approach reveals a behavior directly proportional to the size of processed data. As shown in Figure 13, peak memory usage increases from approximately 13.37 GB for the sample with 10 files to 93.31 GB for the sample with 70 files, indicating an almost linear growth with respect to input size. This behavior highlights the limitations of this approach in larger-scale scenarios. Taking into account the memory consumption and the total execution time for both implementations of the same abstract dataflow, the relevance of captur-ing retrospective provenance information about dataflow runs, and using these data to feed Gypscie’s optimized scheduling process becomes evident. This obser-vation further reinforces the need for Gypscie to reason about execution history when deciding how to initialize and schedule dataflows, since the same logical specification may lead to very different resource profiles depending on the chosen execution technology. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 31 

Figure 13 provides a detailed temporal profile of memory usage with Pan-das for the sample of size 70 (execution 5), enabling a finer-grained analysis across dataflow stages. The cast stage is responsible for the highest memory consumption, reaching peak values during execution and accounting for a signif-icant portion of the total runtime. In contrast, subsequent stages, such as dedup and store, exhibit sharp reductions in memory usage, associated with the release of intermediate data structures. The Gypscie optimizer evaluates a number of heuristics to produce an effi-cient concrete dataflow. In the example use case, the memory consumption and processing time introduced by the cast function can be optimized. Looking more closely at the cast function code, we observe that three columns undergo different casting transformations. For the particular dbz column, i.e., radar reflectivity, the resulting column values are used later in the dataflow for filtering, retaining only values above a certain threshold that identify strong rainfall. However, the dbz casting is hidden within the cast function, which makes it invisible to the Gypscie optimizer. A simple solution is to make the dbz cast function a node in the dataflow. This would allow the Gypscie optimizer to apply the well-known filter pushdown approach, thus reducing the size of processed data at an early stage and, consequently, improving overall system performance. We applied this solution in an alternative, optimized dataflow that moves the filter stage, originally positioned after more costly transformations, to precede the cast stage. Such reordering enables an early reduction in the size of data processed in subsequent stages, positively impacting both memory consumption and total execution time. This optimization case study is particularly relevant for Gypscie because it shows that the abstract dataflow representation is use-ful not only for execution across platforms, but also for exposing optimization opportunities that would be harder to identify and exploit in a less structured pipeline specification. Figure 13 compares the execution times between the original Pandas dataflow and its optimized version, considering the sample of 70 files (execution 5). In the original version, memory usage peaks above 90 GB during the cast stage, whereas in the optimized version this value is reduced to approximately 50 GB, repre-senting a substantial decrease in peak resource consumption. In addition, total execution time is significantly reduced, as computationally intensive operations are applied to a smaller subset of data, thus improving overall efficiency. In summary, the results demonstrate that Gypscie is able to materialize con-crete dataflows from an abstract definition while preserving semantic coherence across different execution platforms. The experimental evaluation revealed sig-nificant differences, highlighting the limitations of the Pandas approach in terms of scalability, both in execution time and memory consumption, in contrast to the more stable and efficient behavior of Spark in larger-scale scenarios. These findings show that Gypscie can represent a dataflow at a high level, instantiate it on distinct AI platforms while preserving its intended semantics, and bene-fit from optimization strategies that improve the operational cost of concrete executions. 32 F. Porto et al.  

> Fig. 13. Comparison of RAM usage over time between the original and optimized dataflows, considering a sample of 70 files processed using Pandas.

# 8 Related Work 

Spurred by the growing adoption of AI across various applications, numerous new systems have been proposed to support the entire AI model lifecycle. Un-like traditional software engineering, the development of AI applications is more iterative and exploratory, yielding a variety of artifacts, including datasets, mod-els, feature sets, model parameters, hyperparameters, metrics, software code, and dataflows. The objective of these new systems is to enable explainability, repro-ducibility, traceability, and comparability of AI executions by supporting the storage, management, and reuse of these artifacts. A systematic literature review of more than 60 such systems, referred to as ML artifact management systems [38], reveals that there is no precise functional scope, thereby making comparisons between systems difficult. Some systems fo-cus on a single class of artifact, while others combine artifact management with development and execution support. To position Gypscie more precisely, we dis-cuss the literature along four complementary axes. First, several systems address AI artifact management across substantial por-tions of the lifecycle. The most comprehensive systems are the major ML-as-a-Service (MLaaS) offerings, such as Azure ML, Amazon SageMaker, and Google Vertex AI, but they are tightly coupled to specific AI platforms or provider ecosystems. Open-source platforms such as MLflow [12], ClearML [13], and Hopsworks [25,21] provide reusable services for tracking, storing, and operat-ing on ML artifacts, while emphasizing different concerns such as experiment tracking, operational support, or metadata and data infrastructure manage-ment. These systems provide important lifecycle support, yet they generally do not expose a unified semantic representation that integrates artifacts, meta-data, provenance, and execution relationships. In particular, they offer powerful lifecycle services, but they do not explicitly treat heterogeneous AI artifacts and their interdependencies as part of a single logic-based integration view. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 33 

Second, a substantial body of work focuses on workflows, pipelines, and ex-ecution environments. Kubeflow [26,27], TensorFlow Extended with ML Meta-data [7], Apache SystemDS [9], and ArangoML Pipeline [2] emphasize orchestra-tion, modularity, lineage, and reproducibility in data processing, model training, and deployment pipelines. Academic systems such as KeystoneML [40], Helix [45], and LifeSWS [1] further highlight optimization, scalability, debugging, and workflow reuse, especially in scientific settings. KeystoneML and Helix, in par-ticular, explore optimization of ML pipelines executed on distributed infras-tructures, whereas LifeSWS extends workflow-oriented support toward scientific applications by making workflow artifacts easier to search, debug, and paral-lelize [1]. However, these systems are primarily execution-oriented: they rep-resent workflows well, but they typically provide limited support for a unified, artifact-centric view spanning datasets, models, provenance, and domain seman-tics across the entire lifecycle. Their main strength lies in execution planning and pipeline management rather than in offering an integrated representation of all AI artifacts manipulated by an application. Third, other systems provide deeper management for specific artifact classes. Experiment management tools such as Weights & Biases [43], Sacred [24], and Guild AI [17] strengthen comparability across training runs, but they remain centered on run metadata rather than end-to-end lifecycle integration. Model-oriented systems such as ModelDB [42], ModelHub [29], and MLModelCI [47] treat trained models and their metadata as first-class entities, supporting ver-sioning, deployment, and monitoring. Data- and feature-oriented systems such as Feast [16], lakeFS [28], Pachyderm [33], and ProvLake [39] emphasize storage, versioning, and provenance tracking for datasets and features. These systems il-lustrate that the literature offers mature solutions for isolated dimensions of the problem: experiment tracking, model governance, or dataset and feature man-agement. However, each remains specialized in a subset of lifecycle stages or artifact types. As a result, an application that relies on several of these capa-bilities still depends on external integration effort to connect models, datasets, transformations, provenance, and execution context in a coherent manner. Finally, recent work on LLM-related artifacts reinforces the need for stronger provenance, transparency, auditability, and lifecycle management operations. RAGOps [46], for example, targets the continuous management of retrieval-augmented generation pipelines in production environments. Synthetic Artifact Auditing [44] focuses on detecting downstream artifacts derived from LLM-generated synthetic data, exposing risks related to traceability, bias, and hallu-cination. Although these proposals address emerging challenges specific to LLM-based systems, they also confirm a broader trend: AI applications increasingly require integrated management of heterogeneous artifacts, their transformations, and their operational context. In this sense, LLM-oriented work does not define a separate problem from the rest of the AI lifecycle; rather, it amplifies existing demands for integrated provenance, artifact correlation, and support for evolving execution pipelines. 34 F. Porto et al. 

In contrast, Gypscie is a high-level and generic system that unifies AI arti-fact management using a knowledge graph across the lifecycle, supports inter-operability with diverse AI frameworks, and provides flexible integration with heterogeneous AI platforms thanks to a high-level dataflow language. 

# 9 Conclusion 

Gypscie is a cross-platform AI artifact management system that unifies artifact management across the entire AI model lifecycle. In this paper, we presented the architecture of Gypscie and its set of services for managing and utilizing datasets, models, functions, dataflows, and provenance information across ML and LLM applications. Gypscie’s architecture builds on advances in web-oriented architectures, con-tainers, and distributed and parallel data management. The platform offers both a web interface that provides user-friendly access to services and an API that enables seamless integration with complex applications. To reduce the complex-ity of developing and deploying AI applications, Gypscie provides a unified view of all artifacts. This view is implemented through a knowledge graph that cap-tures application semantics and a rule-based query language, which enables the retrieval of artifact metadata, domain data, predictions, and provenance infor-mation about artifacts and service execution. Model lifecycle activities are expressed as high-level dataflows, which can be scheduled to run on various platforms such as servers, clouds, or supercomput-ers. We introduced a high-level dataflow language to represent these workflows as DAGs of data transformations. Dataflow processing includes optimization, scheduling, and execution, thereby improving efficiency and resource utilization. Finally, Gypscie captures and manages provenance information about arti-facts and their transformations, thereby supporting explainability, reproducibil-ity, and traceability across diverse application domains. We provide a comprehensive evaluation of the Gypscie system. A qualita-tive comparison with representative AI systems shows that Gypscie supports a broader range of functionalities across the AI artifact lifecycle. It provides de-tailed provenance information for managed artifacts, enabling explainability and reproducibility throughout the entire lifecycle. Additionally, its operator-based dataflows facilitate automatic optimization and scheduling of pipelines, allow-ing them to scale from desktop environments to large infrastructures, including HPC AI platforms. To the best of our knowledge, Gypscie is the only system that supports a unified data and metadata view as a knowledge graph. These qualitative results show that Gypscie supports integrated AI artifact manage-ment by combining semantic querying, provenance support, and cross-platform execution within a single architecture. The experimental evaluation focuses on a key functionality of Gypscie: the ability to optimize and schedule abstract dataflows into concrete executions across multiple platforms. This functionality is assessed through experiments based on a use-case dataflow deployed on two platforms: one capable of running Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 35 

a Python application on a Pandas server and another supporting an Apache Spark dataflow on a cluster. The results demonstrate that Gypscie can success-fully materialize concrete dataflows from an abstract specification while preserv-ing semantic consistency across both AI platforms. The experiments revealed significant performance differences between the two platforms, highlighting the scalability limitations of the Pandas-based approach in terms of execution time and memory consumption. In contrast, Spark exhibited more stable and effi-cient behavior in large-scale scenarios. Furthermore, the results show that the ordering of dataflow operators has a direct impact on performance. Substantial improvements can be achieved through simple restructuring strategies, such as applying filtering operations earlier in the pipeline. In this context, the experimental results reinforce the practical relevance of Gypscie’s cross-platform dataflow instantiation and scheduling capabilities, while also highlighting opportunities for further automation. They show that Gypscie can represent dataflows at a high level, instantiate them across dis-tinct AI platforms while preserving their intended semantics, and benefit from optimization strategies that reduce execution cost. Gypscie thus emerges as a promising and evolving system, with the potential to incorporate automated dataflow optimization mechanisms that can transparently exploit such opportu-nities for performance improvement. As future work, we plan to further investigate these optimization strategies, aiming not only to improve computational efficiency but also to enhance the system’s adaptability to diverse large-scale data processing scenarios. 

# Acknowledgement 

This work was carried out within the context of the Dinizia associated team, a collaboration between Inria and Brazil, and Fabio Porto’s International Chair at Inria. It was partially supported by ANP Cooperation No. 0050.0122040.22.9, the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), and the AI Institute at LNCC. 

# References            

> 1. Akbarinia, R., Botella, C., Joly, A., Masseglia, F., Mattoso, M., Oga-sawara, E., de Oliveira, D., Pacitti, E., Porto, F., Pradal, C., Shasha, D., and Valduriez, P. Life Science Workflow Services (LifeSWS): Motivations and Architecture. Transactions on Large Scale Data and Knowledge Centered Sys-tems 55 (2023), 1–24. 2. ArangoDB .ArangoML Pipeline. Tech. rep., https://github.com/arangoml/, 2025. 3. Baget, J.-F., Bisquert, P., Leclère, M., Mugnier, M.-L., Pérution-Kihli, G., Tornil, F., and Ulliana, F. InteGraal: a Tool for Data-Integration and Reasoning on Heterogeneous and Federated Sources. In BDA 2023 - 39.Conférence sur la Gestion de Données – Principes, Technologies et Applications (Oct. 2023).

36 F. Porto et al. 4. Bala, B., and Behal, S. A Brief Survey of Data Preprocessing in Machine Learning and Deep Learning Techniques. In 2024 8th International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC) (Oct. 2024), pp. 1755–1762. 5. Bastos, J. N., Porto, F., Siqueira, F. L., Gomi, E., Santos, I., Barreira, R., Siqueira, I., and Ogasawara, E. Twinscie-Prov: Gerenciando a Proveniên-cia sobre o Ciclo-de-vida de ML no Sistema Twinscie. In Simpósio Brasileiro de Banco de Dados (SBBD) (Sept. 2025), SBC, pp. 576–588. 6. Baunsgaard, S., Boehm, M., Innerebner, K., Kehayov, M., Lackner, F., Ovcharenko, O., Phani, A., Rieger, T., Weissteiner, D., and Wrede, S. B. Federated Data Preparation, Learning, and Debugging in Apache Sys-temDS. In International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Proceedings (New York, NY, USA, 2022), CIKM ’22, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 4813 – 4817. 7. Baylor, D., Breck, E., Cheng, H.-T., Fiedel, N., Foo, C. Y., Haque, Z., Haykal, S., Ispir, M., Jain, V., Koc, L., Koo, C. Y., Lew, L., Mewald, C., Modi, A. N., Polyzotis, N., Ramesh, S., Roy, S., Whang, S. E., Wicke, M., Wilkiewicz, J., Zhang, X., and Zinkevich, M. TFX: A TensorFlow-Based Production-Scale Machine Learning Platform. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-ing (New York, NY, USA, Aug. 2017), KDD ’17, Association for Computing Ma-chinery, pp. 1387–1395. 8. Beedkar, K., Bertrand, A., Gavriilidis, H., Fonseca, A., Kaoudi, Z., Liu, M., Markl, V., Petersen, J., Porto, F. A. M., and Ribeiro, V. D. P. D. Apache Wayang in Action: Enabling Data Systems Integration via a Unified Data Analytics Framework. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (2025), pp. 35 – 38. 9. Boehm, M., Antonov, I., Baunsgaard, S., Dokter, M., Ginthör, R., In-nerebner, K., Klezin, F., Lindstaedt, S., Phani, A., Rath, B., Reinwald, B., Siddiqi, S., and Wrede, S. B. SystemDS: A Declarative Machine Learning System for the End-to-End Data Science Lifecycle. In Annu. Conf. Innovative Data Syst. Res., CIDR (2020), Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR). 10. Böehm, M., Dusenberry, M. W., Eriksson, D., Evfimievski, A. V., Man-shadi, F. M., Pansare, N., Reinwald, B., Reiss, F. R., Sen, P., and Surve, A. C. SystemML: Declarative machine learning on Spark. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 9 , 13 (2015), 1425 – 1436. 11. Castro, R., Souto, Y. M., Ogasawara, E. S., Porto, F. A. M., and Bez-erra, E. STConvS2S: Spatiotemporal Convolutional Sequence to Sequence Net-work for weather forecasting. Neurocomputing 426 (2021), 285 – 298. 12. Chen, A., Chow, A., Davidson, A., DCunha, A., Ghodsi, A., Hong, S. A., Konwinski, A., Mewald, C., Murching, S., Nykodym, T., Ogilvie, P., Parkhe, M., Singh, A., Xie, F., Zaharia, M., Zang, R., Zheng, J., and Zu-mar, C. Developments in MLflow: A System to Accelerate the Machine Learning Lifecycle. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Data Manage-ment for End-to-End Machine Learning (New York, NY, USA, June 2020), DEEM ’20, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1–4. 13. ClearML . ClearML: The Infrastructure Platform For AI Builders. Tech. rep., https://clear.ml, 2025. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 37 14. da Silva, D. N., Simões, A., Cardoso, C. L. S., de Oliveira, D. E. M., Rittmeyer, J. G., Wehmuth, K., Lustosa, H., Pereira, R. S., Souto, Y. M., and Vignoli, L. E. A conceptual vision toward the management of machine learning models. In ER Forum and Poster & Demos Session (2019), vol. 2469 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings , pp. 15 – 27. 15. Davison, A. P. Automated capture of experiment context for easier reproducibil-ity in computational research. Computing in Science and Engineering 14 , 4 (2012), 48 – 56. 16. Feast . Feast: Feature Store for Machine Learning. Tech. rep., https://feast.dev, 2025. 17. Guild AI . Guild AI: Experiment tracking, ML developer tools. Tech. rep., https://github.com/guildai, 2025. 18. Hellerstein, J. M., and Stonebraker, M. R. Predicate Migration: Opti-mizing Queries with Expensive Predicates. SIGMOD Record 22 , 2 (1993), 267 – 276. 19. Hoens, T. R., Polikar, R., and Chawla, N. V. Learning from streaming data with concept drift and imbalance: An overview. Progress in Artificial Intelligence 1, 1 (2012), 89 – 101. 20. Hogan, A., Blomqvist, E., Cochez, M., D’amato, C., Melo, G. D., Gutierrez, C., Kirrane, S., Gayo, J. E. L., Navigli, R., Neumaier, S., Ngomo, A.-C. N., Polleres, A., Rashid, S. M., Rula, A., Schmelzeisen, L., Sequeda, J., Staab, S., and Zimmermann, A. Knowledge Graphs. ACM Comput. Surv. 54 , 4 (July 2021), 71:1–71:37. 21. Hopsworks . Hopsworks: The AI Factory. Tech. rep., https://www.hopsworks.ai, 2025. 22. IBM . AI Model Lifecycle Management. Tech. rep., https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ai-lifecycle, 2020. 23. Idowu, S. O., Strüber, D. G., and Berger, T. Asset Management in Machine Learning: State-of-research and State-of-practice. ACM Computing Surveys 55 , 7 (2023). 24. IDSIA . Sacred: a tool to help configure, organize, log and reproduce experiments. Tech. rep., https://github.com/IDSIA/sacred/, 2025. 25. Ismail, M., Gebremeskel, E., Kakantousis, T., Berthou, G., and Dowl-ing, J. Hopsworks: Improving User Experience and Development on Hadoop with Scalable, Strongly Consistent Metadata. In Proceedings - International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (2017), pp. 2525 – 2528. 26. Korontanis, I., Zacharia, A., Makris, A., Pateraki, M., and Tserpes, K. 

Streamlining ML Training in Kubernetes: An MLOps Architecture with Kubeflow. In IOT 2025 - Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on the Internet of Things 2025 (New York, NY, USA, 2025), IOT 2025, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 267 – 270. 27. Kubeflow . Kubeflow: the Foundation of Tools for AI Platforms on Kubernetes. Tech. rep., https://www.kubeflow.org, 2025. 28. LakeFS . LakeFS:The Control Plane for AI Data. Tech. rep., https://lakefs.io/, 2026. 29. Miao, H., Li, A., Davis, L. S., and Deshpande, A. ModelHub: Deep Learn-ing Lifecycle Management. In 2017 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) (Apr. 2017), pp. 1393–1394. 30. Miao, X., Wu, Y., Chen, L., Gao, Y., and Yin, J. An Experimental Survey of Missing Data Imputation Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 , 7 (2023), 6630 – 6650. 38 F. Porto et al. 31. Moraes, G., Porto, F., Ulliana, F., Baget, J.-F., Leclère, M., Bisquert, P., Gonçalves, B., and Valduriez, P. Gypscie-KG: Building a Logic-Based Approach for Knowledge Graph Data Integration View in ML Systems | Anais Es-tendidos do Simpósio Brasileiro de Banco de Dados (SBBD). In Simpósio Brasileiro de Banco de Dados (SBBD) (Sept. 2025), SBC, pp. 459–467. 32. Moreau, L., and Groth, P. PROV-Overview: An Overview of the PROV Family of Documents. Tech. rep., W3C, 2013. 33. Novella, J. A., Khoonsari, P. E., Herman, S., Whitenack, D., Capuccini, M., Burman, J., Kultima, K., and Spjuth, O. Container-based bioinformatics with Pachyderm. Bioinformatics 35 , 5 (2019), 839 – 846. 34. Ogasawara, E., de Oliveira, D., Valduriez, P., Dias, J., Porto, F., and Mattoso, M. An algebraic approach for data-centric scientific workflows. Pro-ceedings of the VLDB Endowment 4 , 12 (2011), 1328 – 1339. 35. Ogasawara, E., Salles, R., Porto, F., and Pacitti, E. Event Detection in Time Series , 1 ed. Synthesis Lectures on Data Management. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2025. 36. Pereira, R. S., Souto, Y. M., Chaves, A., Zorilla, R., Tsan, B., Rusu, F., Ogasawara, E. S., Ziviani, A., and Porto, F. A. M. DJEnsemble: A Cost-Based Selection and Allocation of a Disjoint Ensemble of Spatio-Temporal Models. In ACM International Conference Proceeding Series (2021), pp. 226 – 231. 37. Ramusat, Y., Maniu, S., and Senellart, P. Efficient provenance-aware query-ing of graph databases with datalog. In ACM SIGMOD Joint International Work-shop on Graph Data Management Experiences & Systems (GRADES) and Network Data Analytics (NDA) (2022). 38. Schlegel, M., and Sattler, K. U. Management of Machine Learning Lifecycle Artifacts: A Survey. SIGMOD Record 51 , 4 (2023), 18 – 35. 39. Souza, R., Azevedo, L. G., Lourenco, V. N., Soares, E. F. D. S., Thi-ago, R. M., Brandão, R. R. M., Civitarese, D. S., Vital-Brazil, E. A., Moreno, M. F., and Valduriez, P. Workflow provenance in the lifecycle of sci-entific machine learning. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 34 , 14 (2022). 40. Sparks, E. R., Venkataraman, S., Kaftan, T., Franklin, M. J., and Recht, B. Keystone ML: Optimizing pipelines for large-scale advanced analytics. In Proceedings - International Conference on Data Engineering (2017), pp. 535 – 546. 41. Sur, S., Jin, H.-W., Chai, L., and Panda, D. K. RDMA read based rendezvous protocol for MPI over InfiniBand: design alternatives and benefits. In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGPLAN symposium on Principles and practice of paral-lel programming (New York, NY, USA, Mar. 2006), PPoPP ’06, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 32–39. 42. Vartak, M., Subramanyam, H., Lee, W.-E., Viswanathan, S., Husnoo, S., Madden, S., and Zaharia, M. ModelDB: a system for machine learning model management. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Human-In-the-Loop Data Ana-lytics (New York, NY, USA, June 2016), HILDA ’16, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1–3. 43. Weights & Biases . The AI Developer Platform. Tech. rep., https://wandb.ai, 2025. 44. Wu, Y., Yang, Z., Shen, Y., Backes, M., and Zhang, Y. Synthetic Artifact Auditing: Tracing LLM-Generated Synthetic Data Usage in Downstream Applica-tions, Feb. 2025. Gypscie: A Cross-Platform AI Artifact Management System 39 45. Xin, D., Macke, S., Ma, L., Liu, J., Song, S., and Parameswaran, A. 

HELIX: Holistic optimization for accelerating iterative machine learning. In Pro-ceedings of the VLDB Endowment (2018), vol. 12, VLDB Endowment, pp. 446 – 460. 46. Xu, X., Weytjens, H., Zhang, D., Lu, Q., Weber, I., and Zhu, L. RAGOps: Operating and Managing Retrieval-Augmented Generation Pipelines, June 2025. 47. Zhang, H., Li, Y., Huang, Y., Wen, Y., Yin, J., and Guan, K. MLModelCI: An Automatic Cloud Platform for Efficient MLaaS. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2020), MM ’20, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 4453–4456.