Title: Towards Enabling Distance-Based Memory Addressing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.06270v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 00:57:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Towards Enabling Distance-Based Memory Addressing 

Ananth Krishna Prasad 

University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 

ananth@cs.utah.edu 

Rajeev Balasubramonian 

University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 

rajeev@cs.utah.edu 

Mahdi Nazm Bojnordi 

University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 

mnbojnordi@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Approximate Nearest-Neighbor Search (ANNS) in high di-mensional vector datasets is an application of significant prevalence across different AI applications. However, such an operation is significantly bandwidth limited at large working-set sizes owing to the curse of dimensionality . Traditional in-dices used to accelerate ANNS rely on search-space pruning as a preprocessing step to alleviate such bandwidth require-ment, but such optimization occurs either at the cost of in-creased bandwidth-inefficiency and/or degradation of search quality. This paper proposes a data-parallel hardware/soft-ware mechanism for performing large-scale similarity search in-memory. We propose a novel algorithm to simplify the computation requirement for similarity search across various distance metrics through lightweight primitives to perform a fast and approximate data-parallel brute-force search on the entire vector space. We further build a memory system capable of executing the required operations to generate a distance metric per datapoints, which is then used to en-able pruning as a post-processing step. We offer adequate software support for user control over the proposed system. By enabling such search-space pruning as a post-processing step, we achieve near-perfect recall across representative workloads while achieving orders of magnitude performance and energy improvement over state-of-the-art algorithmic approaches on million and billion-scale workloads. 

1 Introduction 

Nearest Neighbor Search (NN-Search) in multidimensional data space is a fundamental problem in computer science. The brute-force approach for finding the nearest neighbor for a given query involves calculating the distance to ev-ery point in the dataset (linear scan). Such an approach is memory-bound owing to the requirement of fetching the entire dataspace for each query. Unfortunately, it is often impossible to provably find the exact nearest neighbors with-out resorting to brute force, especially as the dimension-ality of data increases. This problem is termed popularly as the curse of dimensionality . It turns out that most of the present-day applications of nearest neighbors can tolerate a certain amount of imprecision, leading to the emergence of Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (ANNS). Multi-media such as text, audio, and video can be represented as embedding vectors indexed into a vector database. ANNS in such vector databases are prevalent in a variety of server-scale machine-learning applications such as Large-Language Models [32, 35] used in ChatGPT, information retrieval sys-tems [33, 54], recommendation systems [24, 46], and web search [49]. ANNS algorithms generate indices on the dataset through pre-processing, which is leveraged to prune down the search space for each query. State-of-the-art algorithms for high-dimensional ANNS can be categorized into two main classes - graph-based and compression-based. Compression-based indices use compres-sion/quantization techniques to encode vectors using code-books. This lowers the memory footprint and computational intensity per datapoint [15, 28, 31, 36], but is bandwidth-bound and inaccurate. Graph-based algorithms [22, 34, 36] build neighborhood graphs on top of the uncompressed vec-tor dataset. This approach is highly accurate but not scalable due to significant indexing overhead and bandwidth inef-ficiency stemming from memory indirection during graph traversal. The root cause of inefficiency in the existing in-dices is in the inherently massive bandwidth required to overcome the curse of dimensionality. Irrespective of the underlying approach, it is often necessary to visit a large fraction of the vector dataset to ensure high recall, resulting in bandwidth-bound behavior. This bandwidth-bound characteristic of ANNS applica-tions presents a unique challenge to computer architects. One approach to addressing the bottleneck is to accelerate these indices using Processing-In-Memory and leverage the massive bandwidth available within memory devices. How-ever, traditional indices incur memory indirection during pruning, making a poor fit for the SIMD-like computation model PIM offers. This, coupled with significant computa-tion requirements renders conventional PIM inefficient in accelerating state-of-the-art ANNS indices. To address the above problems, we propose a novel memory system for highly accurate similarity search applications through care-ful hardware-software codesign. We envision the proposed memory system to function as a "Distance-Addressable Mem-ory", or DAM, where the memory is capable of calculating and returning the k-"closest" points to any input query point. The key idea is to utilize the massive internal bandwidth to perform a fast and approximate data-independent brute-force search within memory, then leverage the generated ap-proximate distance metrics to prune the dataspace in a data-parallel fashion. By formulating pruning as a post-processing step to brute-force computation rather than as a pre-filtering step, we manage to mitigate the curse of dimensionality, offering fast similarity search within a high recall space. 

> 1arXiv:2609.06270v1 [cs.AR] 5 Sep 2026

We make the following contributions: 1) We propose a novel algorithm for similarity search that generates an ap-proximate distance metric for vector datasets on a per-query basis. With a simple reformulation of the distance calcula-tion, we support multiple distance metrics. 2) We propose a lightweight near-array processor (NAP) coupled with a 1T-1R-based memory array that computes approximate dis-tances. These distances are then used as indices to gener-ate partially ordered responses from the memory, enabling search-space pruning and bandwidth-efficient data rerank-ing. 3) We identify the challenges in the proposed system and devise data/control-flow techniques that improve effi-ciency. Adequate software support is provided through an API that enables sufficient user control over memory con-figuration. 4) We highlight key metrics in emerging vector database applications, such as index-freshness, support for out-of-distribution queries, and filtered searches, and show how DAM readily extends support for such applications. A simulation-based evaluation of our algorithm and plat-form over a wide variety of real-world embedding vector datasets shows that DAM achieves near-perfect accuracy with 52.7 × and 97 × throughput and latency improvement respectively over a state-of-the-art compression-based ap-proach on an Intel Xeon E5-2680. Each DAM chip consumes 50% more area in comparison to a conventional RRAM chip, while achieving an energy improvement of 4 .15 × on average. 

2 Background and Motivation 

2.1 Similarity Search 

K-Nearest Neighbors. 𝑘 -NN is a supervised learning tech-nique used for the classification or regression of data. For a given dataset, the algorithm takes an input target point along with 𝑘 and returns the 𝑘 closest data points to the target point in terms of a defined distance metric. 

The Curse of Dimensionality. The total volume of the dataspace increases exponentially with an increase in dimen-sionality. This results in very low-density high-dimensional datasets, rendering conventional data structures ineffective in accelerating exact K-NN. Therefore, the most efficient method for finding the exact 𝑘 -nearest neighbors in a given 

𝐷 -dimensional data space (D ≥ 100) is through brute force search [57], making it an 𝑂 (𝑁 × 𝐷 ) operation per query. Given that both computation and bandwidth complexity are dependent on 𝑁 , the brute-force approach is prohibitively expensive at large dataset sizes. 

ANN Search. With a relaxed constraint on the exact-ness of the nearest neighbors, it is possible to index high-dimensional data to find top-𝑘 "similar" data points to any given query. Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (ANNS), or Similarity Search, is an umbrella term used for a range of mechanisms that query across a very large space of objects to find "similar" objects using a defined distance metric. A range of algorithms have been proposed to tackle the ANNS problem defined below: Consider a query q with 𝑑 dimen-sions, and a dataset D with 𝑑 dimensional data points and suppose the algorithm outputs a set X of k candidate near neighbors, and G is the ground-truth set of the k closest neighbors to q. Then, we define the recall-𝑘 @𝑘 of this set 

X to be |𝑋 ∩𝐺 | 

> 𝑘

. The goal of an ANNS algorithm then is to maximize recall while retrieving the results as quickly as possible. There is an inherent trade-off between recall and latency/QPS in any ANN algorithm. Different algorithms operate in different regions within this trade-off space. Most rely on either a compression-based index or a graph-based index. 

2.1.1 Compression-Based Index. Compression-based in-dices, e.g., product quantization, rely on data encoding to compress the data space. They have two major benefits: 1) reduced memory footprint of the total working set and 2) sim-plified distance computation through reduced data bitwidth. 

Product Quantization. Product Quantization ( PQ ) is a source coding technique to compress and encode vectors in a multi-dimensional vector space. The 𝐷 -dimensional vector dataset is split into 𝑀 𝐷 /𝑀 sub-dimensional vector subsets, and 𝑘 ∗ centroids (or codewords) are extracted for each of the 𝑀 sub-dimensional subsets through clustering. These 

𝑘 ∗ codewords within each subset form a codebook. Each subvector within a vector subset is now encoded as the ID of the closest codeword within its corresponding codebook. Combination of all such encodings across all subsets gives us the final compressed representation of each vector. Each dat-apoint in the compressed representation requires 𝑀 log 𝑘 ∗

bits. An example of such encoding is shown in Figure 1 using 

𝑘 ∗ = 4 and 𝑀 = 3 on a 𝐷 =6 dimensional vector. 99 6 5 -3 4 8-3 -3            

> -3
> -3
> 37-2 -9 6548
> 84
> 388
> 8-4 79584777-4 -8
> K* CODEWORDS CODEBOOK 0CODEBOOK 1CODEBOOK 2
> D = 6
> 172 26 5346 122 128 148 4288 1130 10
> 0: 1: 2: 3: 231
> ENCODED VECTOR ORIGINAL VECTOR log(k*)= 2M = 4

Figure 1. Illustrative example of product quantization Search over a raw product quantized dataset requires a brute-force approach, resulting in a high bandwidth require-ment. State-of-the-art methods use an Inverted File Index (IVF) in combination with product quantization to mitigate bandwidth demands. IVF algorithms apply preprocessing to partition the entire vector space to generate |𝐶 | clusters and 

> 2

their corresponding centroid set 𝐶 . Product quantization is applied to each of the vector datasets within these clusters individually to compress the vectorspace. 

Search. The IVF helps in pruning down the search space by allowing an initial level of filtering through a selection of only the 𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 -closest centroids to each query. 𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 

is a search parameter that dictates the depth of the search. The search occurs over the 𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 closest quantized spaces through a brute-force approach for each query, while main-taining a priority list for the top-𝑘 candidates. 

2.1.2 Graph-Based Index. Graph-based indices usually rely on some enhanced version of neighborhood small world (NSW) graphs. NSW graphs are formed by connecting each data point to all its nearest neighbors within a defined radius. Similarity search for a given query point involves greedy traversal across the graph. The accuracy of the search is a function of the depth of the search. High-recall operations require higher search depth, which leads to high bandwidth requirements and inefficiency. Different optimizations have been proposed to the NSW graph approach to alleviate the effect of high search depth, but such benefits are reaped at the cost of increased indexing overhead. The state-of-the-art approach for in-memory graph-based ANNS indexing is the hierarchical navigable small-world graph (HNSW), which defines hierarchies within the NSW graph to allow for long links. 

2.2 Memristive Array Structure wordline bitline selectline 

> 1T-1R Cell
> memristive element

Figure 2. 1T-1R mem-ory cell [59]. Memristive technology has been promoted as an alterna-tive to conventional memories due to their scalability, non-volatility, and being free of leakage power. In particular, resistive RAM (RRAM) is one of the most promising mem-ristive devices under commercial development that shows great potential for building main memory systems. Moreover, they have shown unique capabilities for efficient in-memory processing. Specifically, RRAM-based memory arrays are capable of back-end-of-line (BEOL) integration, where the RRAM cell material can be deposited on just a couple of metal layers to create a memory array, with the remaining layers available for traditional CMOS logic design. Numerous cell architectures have been proposed in the literature that opti-mize RRAM for better reliability, density, and computational capabilities. 1R crosspoints are denser but lack isolated access to individual rows and columns [55]. As the proposed in-situ approach requires isolated column access a 1T1R memory cell (Figure 2) is preferred over the 1R crosspoint. 

2.3 Motivation 

The working set size corresponds to the overall memory foot-print of the data + index. PQ-based approaches have high bandwidth efficiency but are bandwidth-bound. Because they compress data to simplify the bandwidth-bound, they suffer from low recall-𝑘 @𝑘 (≤ 0.6) on their performant configura-tions. This can mainly be attributed to two key reasons: 1) The centroid selection prunes out a significant fraction of the data points automatically on which the distance would never be computed. This is a common pitfall associated with the curse of dimensionality and 2) There is no access to the under-lying raw data for re-ranking. Graph-based approaches offer the capability for high-recall through a more efficient prun-ing approach and support for re-ranking. However, Graph-based approaches impose significant indexing overhead on the underlying raw data, with each datapoint node requiring information regarding its connected neighbors. The search space pruning, which requires multiple-levels of graph tra-versal, is highly bandwidth-inefficient owing to multiple memory indirections. Moreover, current indices fail to gen-

Feature Compression Graph Ours 

Working Set Size 14 to 116 x 2 - 10x [7] 1x Scalability ✓ ✗ ✓

Bandwidth Efficient ✓ ✗ ✓

Bandwidth-Bound ✓ ✓ ✗

High-Recall Support ✗ ✓ ✓

Emerging Applications 

OOD queries ✗ ✗ ✓

Index Freshness ✗ ✗ ✓

Filtered queries ✗ ✗ ✓

Table 1. Compatibility of existing indexing approaches with the proposed approach for vector similarity search eralize for emerging applications listed in table 1. Existing indices fail to generate high-recall for queries sampled out-of-distribution [26] (OOD) wrt the dataset. This is due to the data-dependent nature of index generation by existing algorithms. We hypothesize that a query-based pruning ap-proach, enabled through pruning as a post-processing step, could generalize better for queries OOD. Index freshness [43] refers to the capability of the index to incorporate new vec-tors within its domain. Existing approaches for the same rely on periodic index updates to account for fresh vectors, which incurs significant recall and throughput penalty. A query-based indexing approach offers support for per-query index generation for fresh vectors. Filtered queries [43] re-quires indices to search only across a subset of the original dimensions. Because conventional indices leverage pairwise distances across vectors to extract neighborhood informa-tion, such an index does not capture behavior under just a subset of dimensions. Table 1 summarizes our motivation. 

3 Distance-Aware Pruning 

In short, state-of-the-art algorithms suffer from the curse of dimensionality owing to one common reason: they perform                                                               

> 3- 1-dim query
> 4:1 0 0 X XXX X 6:1 1 0 X XXX X 3:0 1 1 X XXX X 7:1 1 1 X XXX X 2:0 1 0 X XXX X 1:0 0 1 X XXX X 0:0 0 0 X XXX X
> 47 :0 01 0 1 1 1 1209:1 1 0 1 0 0 0 185 :0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1123:0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1218:1 1 0 1 1 0 1 034 :0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0191:1 0 1 1 1 1 1 176 :0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0240:1 1 1 1 0 0 0 05:1 0 1 X XXX X
> KEYS
> 162:1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 DISTANCE - L2
> 413214032
> L1
> 0-1 +1 -2 +2 -3 -4 -5
> DATASET IP
> 25 20 30 15 35 10 50530 10 15 30 525 10 35
> DISTANCE - IP

Figure 3. Example Key Generation for a 1-dimensional query with search on an example dataset. The green highlighted vectors are identified as candidate point using Algorithm 4. an initial pre-filtering step and perform subsequent distance computation ONLY on the filtered dataset. To avoid the same pitfall, we take an alternative approach that performs fast and approximate brute force computation on the entire datas-pace, then performs filtering as a post-processing step. By leveraging the large internal bandwidth to perform both the distance computation and dataspace pruning, we avoid being bandwidth-bound. Summary of Proposed Algorithm 

This section describes the proposed algorithm in detail. We first leverage runtime-quantization through bitmasking to quantize the dataset by masking out the M least signifi-cant bits within each dimension. We then propose a simple data-parallel distance computation mechanism that relies on just 3 basic operations: comparison/XNOR, counting, and addition. We then show how any distance metric can be calculated in an approximate fashion with only these three operations through a simple reformulation of dis-tance calculation. Once these distance values per-vector are generated, we show how to leverage them to prune the dataspace in a data-parallel fashion. 

3.1 Runtime Quantization of Data 

Consider a vector dataset V with D-dimensional vectors and a D-dimensional query 𝜏 , where each 𝑑 ∈ 𝐷 ∈ [ 0, 2𝑁 ], with 

N being the representation bitwidth. Runtime quantization of V relies on the intrinsic properties of fixed-point data. A bitmask applied to the least M bits of 

V quantizes the data from a 2N to a 2(N−M) representation space ( V′), with each value representing 2M values from the 2N space. Such quantization can be used to compress the representation space of both signed and unsigned fixed-point numbers. 

3.2 1-D Pruning Algorithm 

Our pruning method relies on simple operations on quan-tized data to extract the defined distance metric across each dimension. We first show how this works in a single dimen-sion, and then extend it for multi-dimensional data. Consider a target point 𝜏 = 162. Consider an example query that requires us to find 3 similar data points to 𝜏 out of an example dataset V (shown in Figure 3). After generating 

𝜏 ′ and 𝑉 ′, we first identify every possible distance value in the quantized space and map it with the point that would generate the corresponding distance value in relation to 𝜏 ′.These points form our keys 𝐾 , illustrated in Figure 3 with their corresponding L1 and IP distances. We compare each vector in 𝑉 ′ with all generated keys 𝑘 ∈ 𝐾 using bitwise XNOR operations in an iterative fashion, Once a key matches completely with a vector ( 𝑘 = 𝑣 ′), the distance associated with 𝑘 is mapped to the vector. After iterating over all 𝐾 , 3 similar vectors are given by the three vectors closest to the query in the quantized space. 

Algorithm 1 Initialize( 𝑁 , 𝑉 , 𝜏 , 𝑀 ) - Initialization 

1: I ← [ 0, (2𝑁 −𝑀 − 1) ] ⊲ L1/I2 

2: I ← [ 0, (2𝑁 −𝑀 − 1) ] ⊲ IP 

3: K ← { Keys }

4: Dist K ← { Distance per Key }

5: 𝜏 ′ ← 𝜏 /2𝑀 , V′ ← V/2𝑀 

6: Out V ← { Output distance per vector 𝑣 ∈ V}

Algorithm 2 KeyGeneration( 𝐼 , 𝜏 ′, 𝐷 , Metric) - Key Genera-tion 

7: for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 do 

8: for all 𝑑 ∈ 𝐷 do 

9: if Metric = L2 or Metric = L1 then 

10: if 𝜏 ′        

> 𝑑 +𝑖 ≤2𝑁 −𝑀 −1then

11: k𝑖, +      

> 𝑑 =𝜏 ′
> 𝑑 +𝑖 ⊲Positive symmetric coordinate exists

12: if 𝜏 ′     

> 𝑑 −𝑖 ≥0then

13: k𝑖, −      

> 𝑑 =𝜏 ′
> 𝑑 −𝑖 ⊲Negative symmetric coordinate exists

14: if Metric = L2 then 

15: 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑘 = 𝑖 2 ⊲ L2 squared contribution 

16: else 

17: 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑘 = 𝑖 ⊲ L1 contribution 

18: else if Metric = IP and 𝑖 %𝜏 ′     

> 𝑑 == 0then ⊲IP

19: k𝑖 𝑑 = 𝑖 𝜏 ′

> 𝑑

20: 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑘 = 𝑖 

Algorithm 3 DistCalc( 𝑉 ′, 𝐾 ) - Distance Generation 

21: for all 𝑣 ′ ∈ V′ do 

22: for all 𝑘 ∈ K do 

23: if (𝑣 ′ == 𝑘 ) then 

24: 𝑂𝑢𝑡 𝑣 = 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑘 

25: return 𝑚𝑎𝑝 (𝑉 , 𝑂𝑢𝑡 )

Algorithms 1 to 4 formalize the proposed algorithm. The complete sequence is split into 4 different steps - Initial-ization, Key generation, Distance calcuation and Candidate selection. 

3.3 Multidimensional Distance Generation 

Given a multi-dimensional vector dataset, the DistCalc func-tion can be naively applied on a vector dataset in a dimension-wise fashion to generate the manhattan and IP distance metrics from the query across each dimension. These per-dimension values need to be aggregated across dimensions for each vector point. This can be represented as iteration of 

> 4

Algorithm 4 DistPrune( 𝑚𝑎𝑝 (V, Dist ), 𝑀𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐, 𝑘 ) - Candi-date Selection 

1: Out ← ∅ 

2: 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ← 0

3: while 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 < 𝑘 and V ≠ ∅ do 

4: for all 𝑣 ∈ V do 

5: if Metric = L2 & dist v = 0 then ⊲ L-norm 

6: Out ← Out ∪ v

7: V ← V \ v

8: 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 = 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 + 1

9: else if Metric = IP & dist v = NUM_MAX then ⊲ IP 

10: Out ← Out ∪ v

11: V ← V \ v

12: 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 = 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 + 1

13: else 

14: if Metric = L2 then 

15: 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑣 = 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑣 − 1

16: else if Metric = IP then 

17: 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑣 = 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑣 + 1

18: if Count = 𝑘 then 

19: Exit For 

20: return Out 

algorithms 2 and 3 over all dimensions in the dataset. This conventional formulation of the approximate distance calcu-lation using dimension-wise distances 𝐼 𝑑 𝐿 1 and 𝐼 𝑑 𝐼 𝑃 for a given vector is denoted in the below equations: 

𝐼 𝐿 2 =

𝐷 ∑︁ 

𝑑 =1



𝐼 𝑑 𝐿 1

2

/𝐼 𝐼 𝑃 =

𝐷 ∑︁ 

𝑑 =1

𝐼 𝑑 𝐼 𝑃 (1) 101XXXXX 110XXXXX 010XXXXX 100XXXXX 101XXXXX 001XXXXX            

> 110XXXXX 111XXXXX 011XXXXX
> 011XXXXX 100XXXXX 000XXXXX
> 111XXXXX XXXXXXXX 100XXXXX
> 010XXXXX 011XXXXX 101XXXXX
> 001XXXXX 010XXXXX 110XXXXX
> 000XXXXX 001XXXXX 111XXXXX
> XXXXXXXX 000XXXXX XXXXXXXX
> XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
> DISTANCE
> 10100010, 11001101, 01010111
> XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX 001XXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX 010XXXXX
> 001XXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
> XXXXXXXX 001XXXXX 011XXXXX
> XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX 100XXXXX
> 010XXXXX XXXXXXXX 101XXXXX
> XXXXXXXX 010XXXXX 110XXXXX
> XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX 111XXXXX
> ……………. ……………. ……………
> XXXXXXXX 111XXXXX XXXXXXXX
> 10100010, 11001101, 01010111
> KEYS - L2
> 0
> 1
> 4
> 9
> 16
> 25
> 36
> 49
> QUERY: 162, 205, 87
> KEYS - IP
> 2
> 4
> 56
> 810
> 12
> 14
> …
> 42
> DISTANCE
> 101xxxxx ,110xxxxx, 010xxxxx 101xxxxx, 110xxxxx, 010xxxxx
> : QUERY :
> QUANTIZED
> : QUANTIZED :

Figure 4. An example showing key-ordering for search for multidimensional search for a given query with 𝑁 = 8 and 

𝑀 = 5However, such an approach is not SIMD-friendly owing to irregular tree-like access pattern required for aggregation. To facilitate easier adaptation of the proposed algorithm in a data-parallel fashion, we reformulate the distance calcu-lation. In equations 1, we observe that the range of values possible for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 is bounded within [0, (2𝑁 −𝑀 )2] for both L2 and Inner Product. Using the above observation, it helps to rewrite the distance calculation equation as a sum of the number of all possible per-dimension distances multiplied by the count of each unique distance: 

𝐼 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 =

𝐾 ∑︁ 

𝑘 =0

𝑐 𝑘 × 𝑓 (𝑘 ) (2) where 𝐼 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 represents the unified final quantized distance, 

𝐾 represents a multi-dimensional key, where each dimen-sion corresponds to the same distance 𝑓 (𝑘 ) from the given query, and 𝑐 𝑘 represents the count of the number of match-ing dimensions between the quantized vector and query for the corresponding key. This forms the key idea behind our hardware implementation of the proposed algorithms. Such an implementation requires minor tweaks to the DistCalc function, shown in the highlighted region in algorithm 5. 

Algorithm 5 DistCalcMultiD( 𝑉 ′, 𝐾 ) - Distance Generation 

1: for all 𝑣 ′ ∈ V′ do 

2: 𝑂𝑢𝑡 𝑣 ← 0

3: for all 𝑘 ∈ K do 

4: 𝑐 (𝑘 ) ← 0

5: for all 𝑑 ∈ KD do 

6: if (𝑣 ′ [𝑑 ] == 𝑘 [𝑑 ] ) then 

7: 𝑐 (𝑘 ) += 1

8: 𝑂𝑢𝑡 𝑣 + = 𝑐 (𝑘 ) × 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝑘 

9: return 𝑚𝑎𝑝 (𝑉 , 𝑂𝑢𝑡 )

Search Key Generation and Ordering. Algorithm 2 gen-erates the map between each key and it corresponding dis-tance for each dimension. A union operation across all such maps gives us the unified map for the multi-dimensional query. Such an example is shown in Figure 4 for a 3-dimensional datapoint. Though the upper limit on the total number of pos-sible distances is given as (2𝑁 −𝑀 )2, empirically, the number of distances per each query containing a valid key is signifi-cantly lower. Moreover, the number of iterations of line 3 in algorithm 5 is a factor of the number of valid per-dimension values in a key rather than all dimensions, eliminating inef-fectual comparisons. 

4 DAM Architecture 

This section describes how the proposed similarity search algorithm can be implemented in memory through in-situ primitives coupled with lightweight additional logic. High-density memristive cells can be integrated with CMOS-logic using BEOL integration [44, 52], which makes them amenable to low-cost peripheral circuits that are not easily compatible with DRAM cells. We first introduce a 1T-1R memristor-based memory array (DAM array) capable of performing the required in-situ operations, then extend the array with the proposed logic for scaling and accumulating dimension-wise distance metrics. 

4.1 DAM Memory Array 

Figure 5 shows the DAM memristive array capable of data-parallel bit-serial computation. The Sensing and Driving circuit connected to each memory bitline enables it to per-form normal reads and writes. When a specific bitline is being driven, the bitline is charged high (shown in green in the figure). The selectlines are driven by the match vector, which indicate all rows containing the target dataset within the array.     

> 52D Memristive Array
> Sensing circuit Driving Circuit
> Additional Control
> Row Decoder
> Selectline Wordline Bitline MATCH VECTOR Data from Chip
> KEY BUFFER (>>) MASK BUFFER NAP UNIT NAP UNIT NAP UNIT 001

Figure 5. DAM Memory Array 

Bitwise Column Read. For each selected row, any driven bitline gets discharged through the wordline if the corre-sponding memristive element is in a low-resistance ( 𝑅 𝐿 ) state. Similarly, the bitline does not get discharged if the row is in a high-resistance ( 𝑅 𝐻 ) state. Hence, at the end of every bitline search, the corresponding wordlines return a column-wise read of data across all selected rows. To create a near-ideal sit-uation for bitwise read and avoid sneak currents, we choose memristive devices that provide a large dynamic range of resistance states (i.e., 𝑅 𝐻 is much bigger than 𝑅 𝐿 ). Additional logic is employed at the array periphery to generate and operate on the required column-wise reads to realize the proposed algorithm. 

Additional Logic. The additional logic required to enable the proposed algorithm in-memory is illustrated in figure 5. A mask buffer is interfaced at the sensing circuit periph-ery to offer control over bitline selection and ordering. The mask buffer contains a bitmap which is serially traversed to perform the necessary bitline activations. This helps realize the runtime quantization of data in-memory. A Near-Array-Processor (NAP) is interfaced with each wordline in the memory array, which is fed by bit-serial column-wise reads in the memory array. Each NAP performs computation on a series of masked reads and outputs a single bit-value indicat-ing the corresponding row’s candidacy status to the match vector. This match vector denotes the candidacy status of each memory row. 

4.2 Near-Array Processor 

The internals of each NAP unit are shown in Figure 6. Each NAP unit contains an XNOR unit, a stream detection unit, an 8-bit counter, a 16-bit serial multiplier, and a 16-bit thresh-old counter on the input datapath from the memory arrays. Configuration parameters are multiplexed onto the memory write datapath from the chip to enable user control over the NAPs. The NAP output datapath updates the match vector to denote candidacy status. The purpose of each of the pro-posed hardware units is detailed in the paragraph below. 

Key and Mask Buffers: The key and mask buffers (shown in Figure 5) are 2048-bit wide registers. The Key Buffer, incor-porated with right-shift capability, feeds its least significant bit to the XNOR units across all NAPs. Similarly, the mask buffer feeds the mask value to the array one byte at a time. The purpose of the mask buffer is to activate only the re-quired bitlines within the memory array. After each masked bitread and comparison, the Key Buffer is right-shifted to update the LSb. Stream Detection for dimension-wise key matching: The stream detector unit is designed to iden-tify key match per dimension by analyzing every N − M

consecutive output bits from the XNOR unit. If the N − M

consecutive bits are all 1, the stream detector outputs high and resets the pattern, denoting a key match within the corresponding dimension. Count aggregation across di-mensions per key vector: The Stream Detector unit feeds into a 16-bit counter after every N − M cycles, which keeps track of the count of key matches across all dimensions per key vector. This count represents 𝑐 (𝑘 ) in equation 2 after computation on the corresponding 𝑘 key-buffer entry. Scal-ing up of distance through serial multiplication: The counter storing 𝑐 (𝑘 ) for each 𝑘 feeds into a serial multiplica-tion unit, which hosts a 16-bit buffered signed adder coupled with a scaling unit. The scaling unit contains a buffered counter that stores the value of 𝑓 (𝑘 ) corresponding to each key. The adder is integrated with the scaling reg and counter to perform multiplication through a set of iterative addi-tions. Once the computation is performed across all keys, the match vector is reset which initiates the Thresholding phase. At this point, the buffered adder contains 𝐼 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 , which is the approximate distance value based on the given dis-tance metric. Thresholding for candidate selection: Once 

𝐼 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 is generated, the thresholding unit generates the final candidate set (Algorithm 4). The thresholding unit contains a buffered 16-bit counter. This counter can be configured to up-count or down-count, depending on the requirements of the distance metric and application as defined by the algo-rithm. On counter saturation, the corresponding match bit is set in the match vector, indicating candidacy. The threshold counters across all NAPs are reset once the required number of rows are read out, indicating end of search for the current query. 

4.3 Control-flow and Pipelining 

Multiple DAM arrays together form a memory group. A memory group is a single synchronized unit of compute sharing a single copy Key/Mask buffers across its constituent arrays and their NAPs. Each group employs a controller that communicates through the H-tree to orchestrate operations across all NAPs and arrays, and to facilitate candidate data transfer through automatic index generation. This section describes the group controller’s design and operation. 

4.3.1 Control flow. The group controller imposes a control-flow on its constituent NAPs and arrays based on the require-ments of the proposed algorithm. Such control is responsible for orchestration of the different functional units across all    

> 6Stream Detector
> 16-bit Counter
> 16-bit Serial Mult
> Scaling Unit
> Threshold Unit
> CONFIGURATION DATA To Match Vector KeyBuffer LSb Column input CONTROL
> MEMORY ARRAY NAP NAP NAP

# NAP ARRAY GROUP      

> KEY BUFFER Mask Input
> 1
> 11
> 2
> 4
> 33GROUP CONTROLLER 4-bit Cntrl 1-bit key lsb C/A/D wires
> MASK BUFFER

Figure 6. Organization of a Memory Group. Each group consists of multiple arrays connected through a H-tree. The H-tree routs control, configuration parameters and mask to their corresponding destinations within each array and NAP. The different pipeline stages - denoted by shaded pattern per unit/buffer - are shown in the legend NAPs and arrays. Each NAP is pipelined to ensure maximal throughput. The different pipeline stages are highlighted in Figure 6. Sufficient double buffering is enabled at the pe-riphery of each unit within the NAP to enable the required pipeline. We discuss each of the pipeline stages and how the computation is overlapped across the different stages. 

Pipelining. Figure 6 highlights the different pipelening stages within a memory group. Stage 1 corresponds to the transfer of new key/scale/bitmask and mask values into their corresponding buffers to initiate a search for a given query. The configuration parameters are broadcasted to all the NAPs under the group controller’s domain, with each parameter being transferred in a serial fashion owing the the shared bus. Once these writes are performed, the chip controller initializes the bit-serial read across arrays, which initializes 

Stage 2 of the pipeline. Once computation corresponding to the key/mask is completed and 𝑐 (𝑘 ) is generated, the group controller instructs all NAPs to begin accumulation into the global counter, initializing Stage 3 of the pipeline. Stage 3 performs accumulation of each per-scale count into the existing partial sum buffer, upon completion of which across all keys corresponding to a query writes into the threshold unit, which initializes Stage 4 of the pipeline. During stage 4, the saturation of threshold unit counter results in a match vector update, which then signals data transfer availability for that specific row. Stage 4 is executed only once all keys corresponding to a query are done, and overlaps with the execution of keys corresponding to the next query. 

Handling Stalls. The Key and Mask buffers at the group controller are shared across different arrays to keep the area overhead at a minimum. However, The central location of the group controller necessitates synchronous operation across all the arrays. Units done with a specific stage need to wait for the other units across all NAPs to complete their com-putation. The execution times of stages 1, 2 and 4 are the same across all arrays within the group. However, the execu-tion time of the accumulation stage depends on 𝑐 (𝑘 ), which might vary across arrays. To account for such pipeline stalls, all units present within each NAP send signals through the additional control bus denoting completion of the operation. This bit undergoes logical AND across all arrays within the group during upstream propagation, such that the group controller receives a completion signal only when all NAPs have completed the corresponding stage. -16 -32 -48 -64 xx xx xx xx COUNTER SATURATES BUS IN USE TIME STEPS MV-0 MV-1 MV-0 NAP PIPELINE THRESHOLD COUNTER MATCH VECTOR .……... .……... MV-1 NAP PIPELINE CASE 2: BUS ALWAYS IN USE MV-0 TRANSFER LATENCY HIDDEN PIPELINE STALLED FOR DATA TRANSFER CASE 1: BUS RELINQUISHED BY NAP CASE 1 

Figure 7. Different scenarios of data transfer pipelining within the DAM architecture 

Data Transfers. The transfer of data corresponding to a previous query can happen concurrently with the compu-tation for the next query. However, Pipeline stages 1 and 2 utilize the data-bus and the data-arrays respectively, which requires stalling of such stages to enable data transfer. If the current pipeline stage within a given array is waiting for accumulation to complete, the group controller can transfer out data for the previous query through the data bus, thereby hiding the latency of such data transfer. If the accumulation stage fails to hide the complete data transfer latency, the pipeline is stalled till the data transfer completes. However, if stage 1 or 2 determines the execution time of a pipeline stage, it is not possible to transfer data during that stage. A worst-case situation is when none of the pipeline stages relinquish the data bus, which requires stalling of compu-tation after current query to complete data transfer for the 

> 7

previous query. Both cases are illustrated in Figure 7, using an example 𝐼 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 in the range 48 to 64. 

4.4 Memory Organization 

Multiple memory chips are interfaced within a dual in-line memory module (DIMM) that offers scalability and paral-lelism across chips. A memory chip consists of multiple ranks, with each rank containing multiple chips. Each DIMM is in-terfaced with the CPU using the DDR protocol, resulting in a physical off-chip connection through 64 data pins. These 64 data pins are shared across all ranks, resulting in rank-level parallelism. Each chip within a rank is distributed across the 64 data-wires in an equal fashion. 

4.4.1 Memory Chip. A memory chip consists of multiple memory groups interconnected using an H-tree to route commands( C)/address( A) to, and data( D) to/from each group to the chip periphery. A chip controller is implemented at the periphery of each chip to orchestrate operation across different groups. Each chip maintains a 64B register to store the incoming key from the CPU. Each successive key/mask entry is buffered at the periphery when its preceding key buffers are being executed within the memory, to hide the latency of off-chip key/mask transfers from the CPU. Once each memory group completes the required computation and data transfers corresponding to a single pipeline step, the chip controller issues a write to broadcast the next key buffer entry to all group controllers. 

Tree-Based Index Generation. We add additional wires to the H-tree nodes between each group and the chip con-troller to support priority-encoding-based address genera-tion for the candidate points, inspired by previous work [39] to support indexing of data spread across groups. Each group controller maintains the smallest physical address of all valid candidate rows within its domain, internally gener-ated through the group H-tree. This address is propagated upstream the H-tree, where each H-tree performs priority encoding of its leaves’ addresses to extract the current active least address. Once its corresponding datapoint is read out and the corresponding match vector reset, this propagates upstream the H-tree and the index for the datapoints with the next-least physical address is generated. This approach allows the chip controller to buffer these generated addresses to perform bandwidth-efficient candidate fetches internally within the memory. These addresses corresponding to a sin-gle datapoint act as the candidate index. For each datapoint transferred to the chip controller, it maintains a counter to keep track of the number of candidate points being fetched. If such a value increases beyond a parameterizable threshold, the chip controller insrtucts the groups to reset all threshold counters, signaling the end of search. To allow for sufficient time for H-tree propagation and candidate counters to up-date, the chip-controller instructs all the threshold counters to stall after every 32 cycles (determined through evaluation) to allow for interleaved data transfer and counter update. 

4.5 Area overhead Mitigation 

Though each NAP contains only simple functional units, the overall design presents a non-trivial area overhead. A NAP unit per row within the memory array increases the total area of the memory by almost 6x. To mitigate the same, we propose multiplexing of NAPs across 𝑁 𝑀𝑈 𝑋 consecutive rows within an array to mitigate the total area overhead. The group controller is given necessary additional wires as part of the H-tree to control the multiplexers across the different memory arrays to ensure correct operation under multiplexing of resources. However, as a consequence of the same, processing of all datapoints within each group now requires 𝑁 𝑀𝑈 𝑋 steps over all keys 𝑘 , which increases overall latency and decreases overall throughput. A detailed analysis of the same is presented in the evaluation section. 

5 Software Support 

Configuration Parameters. The search quality of DAM is determined by two parameters - the bitmask M which defines the quantized range of values, and the coverage (or 

Cov ), which defines the degree of overfetch within every chip during data transfer. A decrease in bitmask 𝑀 results in an increase in quantized data-width, which increases com-pute latency by increasing both 𝑁 𝐾𝑒𝑦𝑠 and the number of bitwise searches required within the array at the benefit of higher precision. An increase in coverage results in an in-crease in the number of vectors to transfer accompanied by an increase in overall latency, but gives higher recall guar-antees through re-ranking. 

Address Mapping. The presence of multiplexing makes address mapping tricky, especially if each NAP can contain multiple vectors within its domain. All NAPs point to the same memory row across all groups to ensure data paral-lelism. This results in a logical partition of data that cuts across memory rows, arrays, groups, and chips, called a Set .Formally, we define a set as the collection of memory rows that maintain ownership of the NAP unit at the current it-eration of computation. To keep computation latency at a minimum, it is important to map data to the memory on a "set-first" basis. Data spread across different sets cannot be computed upon in the same iteration. The memory controller uses the size of each vector datapoint to compute the number of rows required to store each datapoint. 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 divided by this number defines the effective size of each memory set, which is then used during address mapping to interleave consecutive vectors across different sets. 

5.1 Programming model and API 

We design a userspace API library for DAM. This API en-ables users to 1) allocate memory in the accelerator 2) Set 

> 8

configuration parameters prior to each search 3) Generate 

𝐾𝑒𝑦 and 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 data structures on the CPU and write them to all chips within the defined memory region and 4) fetch candidate points across all chips upon search completion. Memory DIMMs are not capable of sending signals to the CPU without a prior request. Hence, the CPU polls to check for data availability across the DIMMs. Such polling is made efficient by leveraging information about the 𝐾𝑒𝑦 

dataset to accurately estimate the timing of data transfer availability. Once data is available at the chip periphery, the memory controller starts broadcasting requests across all sets that contain valid data. The chip controller receives each read request at the periphery, then performs a single data burst to send the 64-bit address of the datapoint out from the memory (required for candidate ID generation), which is followed by multiple data bursts to fetch the 512-bit cache line from the chip. Multiple chips participate in the data transfer by sending part of its candidate vector, resulting in peak bandwidth efficiency during data transfer. 

6 Experimental Setup 

Architecture. We model the operations of DAM with a lightweight memory simulator model based on ESESC [14] and interface the issuing of commands through a QEMU. To realize the API and software support, we modify QEMU for an extended version of memkind library [8] that enables special memory allocation required to initialize the search ranges and enables writes to configuration address space within the different DAM DIMMs. Table 3 shows DAM pa-rameters. 

Circuits. The memory array and its associated sensing circuits, drivers, group controller, and interconnect elements are modeled using NVSim/NVMExplorer [18, 37] integrated with resistive memory parameters from prior work [53]. All the additional gates, latches, and the control logic required for the near-array processing are synthesized using the Syn-opsys Design Compiler [1] with GlobalFoundries [2] at 12nm. All the SRAM units for the tables and data buffers at the chip controller, alongwith additional H-tree wiring are evaluated using CACTI 7.0 [16]. The match vectors and additional H-tree wiring incur a 5% area overhead per group. 

Baseline System. We run the baselines on a 56-core In-tel Xeon E5-2680 with a memory bandwidth of 102.4 GBps and measure execution time across the different kernels and workloads. Each datapoint is accumulated across multiple runs to average the noise in our baseline measurements. 

Datasets. We consider 4 popular billion-scale workloads (BIGANN, Microsoft-SPACEV, Facebook-SSNPP and Yandex-text2Image) representative of real workloads (embedding vectors) used in similarity search applications [42], shown in Table 2. We also evaluate million-scale splits for each of the datasets to measure performance at million-scale. 

Table 2. Workloads. Name Dims Vectors DataType Distance 

BigANN 128 1B uint8 L2 

MS-S 100 1B int8 L2 

SSNPP 256 1B uint8 L2 

TTI1B 200 1B int8 1 IP 

Algorithms. We consider different compression and graph-based implementations as state-of-the-art baselines. We con-sider IndexIVFPQ [10] as the compression-based baseline and 

IndexHNSW [9] as the graph-based baseline. The large in-dexing overheads of the graph approach make it prohibitive to faithfully model a billion-scale baseline using the given system configuration. For IVFPQ, we consider 2x and 4x compression for million-scale, and 8x and 16x compression for billion-scale data respectively, while varying the number of codewords ( 𝑘 ∗) and the number of subvectors ( 𝑀 ). Differ-ent points within the recall/throughput vs latency space for each configuration are measured by varying 𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 and 𝐿 

for the different IVFPQ and HNSW baselines. 𝐿 defines the depth of greedy search in the HNSW graph. For DAM, we consider 3 bitmask values ( M = 3/4/5) each operating with three different coverage values ( Cov = 1/5/10). We consider a tight metric of recall-100@100 for all our evaluations. 

Table 3. Simulation parameters.                     

> Core Type 56 Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 v4 @ 2.40GHz
> Cache Instruction L1 32KB, direct-mapped, 64B block
> Data L1 32KB, 4-way, LRU, 64B block
> Data L2 256KB, 16-way, LRU, 64B block
> Data L3 32MB, 32-way, LRU, 64B block
> Main  Memory 256GB, 4KB row buffer, DDR4-1600
> Configuration Channels/DIMMs/Ranks/Chips: 8/1/2/16. 8 Gb chips
> Timing tRCD:44, tCAS:44, tCCD:16, tWTR:31, tWR:4, tRTP:46, tBL:10
> (CPU cycles) tCWD:61, tRP:44, tRRD:16, tRAS:112, tRC:271, tFAW:181
> DAM  Memory 256GB, 4KB row buffer, DDR4-1600, 16 8Gb DAM chips/rank.
> Configuration Channels/DIMMs/Ranks/Chips: 8/1/2/32. 256 512x512 SLC subarrays/group. 128 groups/chip
> NAP/Memory 𝑡 bit :1, 𝑡 writebuf :64, 𝑡 count :1, 𝑡 add :8
> Parameters 𝑇 read :4.3ns, 𝑇 write :54.2ns, 𝑣 Write :2V, 𝑣 Compute :1V

Emerging Applications. The Yandex-text2Image dataset works with cross-modal queries (text-based embedding queries on image-based embedding), where the queries are out-of-distribution in comparison to the dataset. Index freshness is a trivial problem for our proposed approach, which just needs the corresponding memory range to be initiated and the datapoints to be written into the memory range. Filtered queries can be incorporated during 𝐾𝑒𝑦 datastructure gen-eration through masking of the corresponding dimensions that need to be excluded from search. 

> 1Quantized from float32
> 9

7 Evaluations 

7.1 Area Analysis 

To identify the optimal multiplexing configuration for DAM, we plot the average throughput of a DAM chip across all datasets using all chosen bitmask and coverage parameters in Figure 8. The X-axis shows the area overhead of all addi-tional circuitry within each memory chip as a fraction of the chip area, while the Y-axis shows the average throughput across all measured configurations. 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 corresponds to the number of rows multiplexed with one NAP unit within an ar-ray. We observe that throughput steadily increases with the increasing area overhead, which tapers off significantly be-tween 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 = 8 and 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 = 16. This throughput stagnation is owing to the shift of bottleneck from compute to external bandwidth with the decreasing value of 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 . To account for peak power limitations, we proceed with a conservative choice of 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 = 16 for our evaluations. 

Figure 8. Area overhead v/s Throughput analysis to identify optimal multiplexing 

7.2 Million-Scale Evaluations 

Figure 9 shows the throughput and latency improvements across different configurations of the IVFPQ and HNSW base-lines on 1M data splits. Each PQ trend is characterized by three values - |𝐶 |, 𝑘 ∗, and Compression Ratio . Each trend captures the behavior of the underlying index under varying degrees of search-space pruning, controlled using 𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 

and 𝐿 2 in IVFPQ and HNSW respectively. The DAM config-uration points are denoted by an "x", while the baselines are denoted by dots. 

Throughput Analysis. The top half of Figure 9 shows the queries-per-second (QPS) v/s recall trade-off space for the different baselines and DAM. The top-right corner represents ideal performance. Most DAM configurations are situated near the most optimal corner of the QPS v/s recall space. Each DAM trend line corresponds to a specific M, with trends shown for varying Cov . We see that the DAM and HNSW baselines can achieve high recall while operating at a better  

> 2𝐿 defines the depth of the search in the HNSW graph

throughput wrt the PQ throughputs, owing to support for re-ranking. Majority of this QPS improvement can be attributed to the proposed address mapping optimized to minimize the number of iterations, on top of the reduction in bandwidth-requirement. In MSSPACEV, we notice that an increase in 

M from 4 to 5 results in a significant QPS degradation. This is attributed to the aliasing effects of approximate distance calculated within the quantized space, with a large fraction of vectors having the same quantized distance. This effect is exacerbated by an increase in coverage. Analysis on the TTI 1M dataset shows that DAM can achieve almost perfect recall even with out-of-distribution queries, while HNSW plateaus at around 0 .8 recall. The negligible increase in QPS DAM-3 and DAM-4 in TTI can be attributed to the nature of Inner-Product computation within DAM being bound by the NAP accumulation stages. This allows for significant latency hiding through pipelined data transfers. 

Latency Analysis. The bottom half of Figure 9 shows the 99th percentile tail latencies for the different configurations. HNSW has better tail latencies at lower recall spaces owing to the small working-set size, resulting in decreased average memory access time. However, with increasing 𝐿 , the laten-cies converge towards DAM, denoting that the working-set size exceeds the processor cache size. The aliasing effects are distinctly visible for DAM-5 MSSPACEV, with a drastic increase in latency in comparison to DAM-4. The increase in Cov only results in a minimal increase in tail latency across most configurations. This is due to DAM’s bandwidth-efficient transfer of data. DAM achieves 8.2x/100x/9x/2x and 972x/985x/85x/100x throughput and latency improvement over the best PQ baseline configuration across the 4 datasets respectively. 

7.3 Billion-Scale Evaluations 

Figure 10 shows the throughput and latency improvements across different configurations of the IVFPQ and HNSW base-lines on the 1B datasets. Index construction was performed on chunks of 500 million owing to memory limitations. We run each chunk independently with full available bandwidth and take a max of the two execution times to measure the final execution time. We perform data re-ranking across the obtained candidates from both to generate the final recall. Such a setup acts as an upper bound for true baseline both for recall and latency. 

Throughput analysis. The baseline QPS trendlines fol-low the same pattern as the 1M case but saturate at a much lower recall. This is due to the inability of the Product Quan-tizer to capture the data distribution accurately with increas-ing data scale. DAM achieves very high recall irrespective of the dataset across all values of M and Cov . This is a result of the inherent overfetch of data enabled by chip-level paral-lelism. However, the fraction of the entire dataset visited per query still remains a low percentage ( ≤ 10 −3%). Moreover,                                                    

> 10 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> QPS
> BigANN 1M
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> SSNPP 1M
> 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> MSSPACEV 1M
> 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> TTI 1M (OOD) 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 Recall 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Latency
> C = 250, k* = 16, 4x C = 250, k* = 256, 4x C = 250, k* = 16, 8x C = 250, k* = 256, 8x C = 1000, k* = 16, 4x C = 1000, k* = 256, 4x C = 1000, k* = 16, 8x C = 1000, k* = 256, 8x DAM-3 DAM-4 DAM-5 HNSW
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Recall 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Recall 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3

Figure 9. Throughput and Tail Latency comparison on different 1M dataset-splits between DAM and baselines. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 10 1                            

> 10 2
> 10 3
> QPS
> BigANN 1B
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> SSNPP 1B
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> MSSPACEV 1B
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> TTI 1B (OOD) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Latency
> k* = 16, 4x k* = 256, 4x k* = 16, 8x k* = 256, 8x k* = 16, 16x k* = 256, 16x DAM-3 DAM-4 DAM-5
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> k* = 16, 4x k* = 256, 4x k* = 16, 10x k* = 256, 10x k* = 16, 20x k* = 256, 20x DAM-3 DAM-4 DAM-5
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4

Figure 10. Throughput and Tail Latency comparison on 1B indices between DAM and baselines. such data transfer happens in a highly bandwidth-efficient fashion. There is a sharp decrease in QPS with the increase in coverage for SSNPP and TTI with DAM-5, due to the aliasing effect at lower precisions. Interestingly, MSSPACEV does not suffer this problem at billion scale, owing to the abysmal performance of the DAM-3 𝐶𝑜𝑣 = 1, which obfuscates any further change in throughput with increasing coverage. 

Latency analysis. Unlike the 1M case, there is an in-verse correlation between the trends observed in the base-line throughput and recall. This shows that PQ is severely bandwidth-bound at large data scales. BIGANN and MSS-PACEV suffer from increased effects of coverage on tail la-tency due to the low latencies achieved by M = 1. On the other hand, increasing coverage of DAM-5 hardly results in a latency increase owing to the poor latency achieved by M = 1. DAM achieves 13.3x/76.2x/4.8x/1.3x and 937x/603x/3.8x/1.9x throughput and latency improvement over the best PQ base-line configuration across the 4 datasets respectively, with DAM achieveing near-perfect recall across all configurations. 

7.4 Energy and Power Analysis 

Power. For the selected configuration of 𝑁 𝑀𝑢𝑥 = 16, each group controller with its associated NAP, wiring, and buffers operates at a peak power of 382 𝑢𝑊 . The peak power of each proposed 8Gb memory chip is around 0.488W. Most of this power consumption occurs from the switching activity and data movement associated with the NAP, the group, and chip controllers to enable the required computation. In practice, the actual power is lower because of the intermittent pipeline stalls incurred during data transfer. 

Energy. Though a DAM chip operates at a higher power limit than a conventional memory DIMM, the proposed mem-ory system achieves 28 .5×, 8 .57 ×, 67 .4×, 2 .21 × energy im-provements in comparison to the most optimal configuration 

11 of BIGANN, MS-SPACEV, SSNPP, and TTI respectively. This is predominantly due to the massive reduction in data move-ment enabled by DAM. 

8 Related Work 

Similarity Search Algorithms. There are many software approaches to ANNS, including graph-based [5, 19, 27, 45, 51]. DiskANN [4] is a suite of different Vamana [45] based graph algorithms, with support for filtered queries [21] and index freshness [43]. However, such graph-based indices incur sig-nificant memory overhead to store metadata and are hence scaled out to disks. The cost model in such cases differs ow-ing to the primary bottleneck being SSD-round trip access latency [45]. We instead focus on the in-memory acceler-ation of similarity through a novel algorithm design to fit the proposed distance-based addressable memory model. Compression-based approaches are typically based on prod-uct quantization, e.g., OPQ [20] and Google ScaNN [23]. How-ever, PQ fundamentally lacks re-ranking support. Alternative techniques employ locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [3, 41, 47, 61] or trees [6], but such approaches perform poorly at scale. Several startups offer ANNS-as-a-service [11, 12, 50] with support for many of the above algorithms. 

Hardware Acceleration of ANNS. ANNA [31] proposes an accelerator for PQ through memo-ization with relaxed recall requirements. Such an approach fails to scale to high-recall at tighter recall guarantees owing to inherent algorith-mic limitations. TPU-KNN [17] leverages Google TPUs [29] through a novel algorithm to accelerate ANNS. FPGA-based accelerators [13, 60] for PQ fail to scale to billion-scale data. Tigris [56] proposes a similarity search accelerator, but ex-clusively in the context of 3D pointcloud processing. 

Processing-In-Memory. Resistive RAM-based processing-in-memory has been deployed for machine learning [25, 40, 58] to more general-purpose architectures for bitwise pro-cessing [30, 48] for data-parallel applications [38]. However, many of these works require a significant number of memory writes, which limits the lifetime of the cells. We rely on a bit-serial processing model that does not require any writes to the memory during computation. 

9 Conclusions 

High-dimensional ANNS is an important emerging problem due to the prevalence of vector databases. However, most existing approaches fail to achieve high recall as dataset scale increases, because they employ pruning mechanisms to cir-cumvent the bandwidth bound. This paper proposes a novel memory system ("DAM") capable of accessing data based on its approximate proximity to a given query. By employing pruning as a post-processing step within memory, DAM is able to achieve high recall irrespective of dataset charac-teristics, while offering significant performance and energy improvements over state-of-the-art software baselines. 

References 

[1] Design compiler. https://www.synopsys.com/implementation-and-signoff/rtl-synthesis-test/dc-ultra.html . (Accessed on 11/30/2023). [2] FinFET | GlobalFoundries — gf.com. https://gf.com/technology-platforms/finfet/ . [Accessed 24-11-2023]. [3] Github - falconn-lib/falconn: Fast lookups of cosine and other nearest neighbors (based on fast locality-sensitive hashing). https://github. com/FALCONN-LIB/FALCONN . (Accessed on 11/29/2023). [4] Github - microsoft/diskann: Graph-structured indices for scalable, fast, fresh and filtered approximate nearest neighbor search. https: //github.com/microsoft/DiskANN . (Accessed on 11/29/2023). [5] Github - microsoft/sptag: A distributed approximate nearest neigh-borhood search (ann) library which provides a high quality vector index build, search and distributed online serving toolkits for large scale vector search scenario. https://github.com/microsoft/SPTAG .(Accessed on 11/29/2023). [6] Github - spotify/annoy: Approximate nearest neighbors in c++/python optimized for memory usage and loading/saving to disk. https://github. com/spotify/annoy . (Accessed on 11/29/2023). [7] hnsw(faiss). https://ann-benchmarks.com/hnsw(faiss).html . (Ac-cessed on 11/27/2023). [8] Memkind. [9] Struct faiss::indexhnsw — faiss documentation. https://faiss.ai/cpp_ api/struct/structfaiss_1_1IndexHNSW.html . (Accessed on 11/30/2023). [10] Struct faiss::indexivfpq — faiss documentation. https://faiss.ai/cpp_ api/struct/structfaiss_1_1IndexIVFPQ.html . (Accessed on 11/30/2023). [11] Vector database for vector search | pinecone. https://www.pinecone.io/ .(Accessed on 11/29/2023). [12] Vespa github. https://github.com/vespa-engine . (Accessed on 11/29/2023). [13] Ameer M.S. Abdelhadi, Christos-Savvas Bouganis, and George A. Constantinides. Accelerated approximate nearest neighbors search through hierarchical product quantization. In 2019 International Con-ference on Field-Programmable Technology (ICFPT) , pages 90–98, 2019. [14] Ehsan K Ardestani and Jose Renau. Esesc: A fast multicore simulator using time-based sampling. In 2013 IEEE 19th International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , pages 448–459. IEEE, 2013. [15] Artem Babenko and Victor Lempitsky. The inverted multi-index. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 37(6):1247– 1260, 2014. [16] Rajeev Balasubramonian, Andrew B. Kahng, Naveen Muralimanohar, Ali Shafiee, and Vaishnav Srinivas. Cacti 7: New tools for interconnect exploration in innovative off-chip memories. ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. , 14(2), jun 2017. [17] Felix Chern, Blake Hechtman, Andy Davis, Ruiqi Guo, David Majne-mer, and Sanjiv Kumar. Tpu-knn: K nearest neighbor search at peak flop/s. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15489– 15501, 2022. [18] Xiangyu Dong, Cong Xu, Yuan Xie, and Norman P Jouppi. Nvsim: A circuit-level performance, energy, and area model for emerging nonvolatile memory. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 31(7):994–1007, 2012. [19] Cong Fu, Chao Xiang, Changxu Wang, and Deng Cai. Fast approximate nearest neighbor search with the navigating spreading-out graph. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00143 , 2017. [20] Tiezheng Ge, Kaiming He, Qifa Ke, and Jian Sun. Optimized prod-uct quantization. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 36(4):744–755, 2013. 

> 12

[21] Siddharth Gollapudi, Neel Karia, Varun Sivashankar, Ravishankar Kr-ishnaswamy, Nikit Begwani, Swapnil Raz, Yiyong Lin, Yin Zhang, Neelam Mahapatro, Premkumar Srinivasan, Amit Singh, and Har-sha Vardhan Simhadri. Filtered-diskann: Graph algorithms for ap-proximate nearest neighbor search with filters. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 , WWW ’23, page 3406–3416, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. [22] Ruiqi Guo, Quan Geng, David Simcha, Felix Chern, Sanjiv Kumar, and Xiang Wu. New loss functions for fast maximum inner product search. 

CoRR , abs/1908.10396, 2019. [23] Ruiqi Guo, Philip Sun, Erik Lindgren, Quan Geng, David Simcha, Felix Chern, and Sanjiv Kumar. Accelerating large-scale inference with anisotropic vector quantization, 2020. [24] Narges Hasanzadeh and Yahya Forghani. Improving the accuracy of m-distance based nearest neighbor recommendation system by using ratings variance. Ingénierie des Systèmes d’Information , 24(2), 2019. [25] Mohsen Imani, Saransh Gupta, Yeseong Kim, and Tajana Rosing. Float-pim: In-memory acceleration of deep neural network training with high precision. In Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture , pages 802–815, 2019. [26] Shikhar Jaiswal, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, Ankit Garg, Har-sha Vardhan Simhadri, and Sheshansh Agrawal. Ood-diskann: Ef-ficient and scalable graph anns for out-of-distribution queries, 2022. [27] Jerzy W Jaromczyk and Godfried T Toussaint. Relative neighborhood graphs and their relatives. Proceedings of the IEEE , 80(9):1502–1517, 1992. [28] Hervé Jegou, Hervé Jegou, Matthijs Douze, and Jeff Johnson. Faiss: A library for efficient similarity search, Jun 2018. [29] Norman P. Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gau-rav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Bo-den, Al Borchers, Rick Boyle, Pierre luc Cantin, Clifford Chao, Chris Clark, Jeremy Coriell, Mike Daley, Matt Dau, Jeffrey Dean, Ben Gelb, Tara Vazir Ghaemmaghami, Rajendra Gottipati, William Gulland, Robert Hagmann, C. Richard Ho, Doug Hogberg, John Hu, Robert Hundt, Dan Hurt, Julian Ibarz, Aaron Jaffey, Alek Jaworski, Alexan-der Kaplan, Harshit Khaitan, Andy Koch, Naveen Kumar, Steve Lacy, James Laudon, James Law, Diemthu Le, Chris Leary, Zhuyuan Liu, Kyle Lucke, Alan Lundin, Gordon MacKean, Adriana Maggiore, Maire Mahony, Kieran Miller, Rahul Nagarajan, Ravi Narayanaswami, Ray Ni, Kathy Nix, Thomas Norrie, Mark Omernick, Narayana Penukonda, Andy Phelps, and Jonathan Ross. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. 2017. [30] Shahar Kvatinsky, Dmitry Belousov, Slavik Liman, Guy Satat, Nim-rod Wald, Eby G Friedman, Avinoam Kolodny, and Uri C Weiser. Magic—memristor-aided logic. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Sys-tems II: Express Briefs , 61(11):895–899, 2014. [31] Yejin Lee, Hyunji Choi, Sunhong Min, Hyunseung Lee, Sangwon Beak, Dawoon Jeong, Jae W. Lee, and Tae Jun Ham. Anna: Specialized architecture for approximate nearest neighbor search. pages 169–183, 2022. [32] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, ed-itors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459–9474. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. [33] Malte Ludewig, Iman Kamehkhosh, Nick Landia, and Dietmar Jannach. Effective nearest-neighbor music recommendations. In Proceedings of the ACM Recommender Systems Challenge 2018 , pages 1–6. 2018. [34] Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,42(4):824–836, 2018. [35] Yuning Mao, Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Yelong Shen, Jianfeng Gao, Jiawei Han, and Weizhu Chen. Generation-augmented retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08553 ,2020. [36] Yusuke Matsui, Yusuke Uchida, Hervé Jégou, and Shin’ichi Satoh. A survey of product quantization. ITE Transactions on Media Technology and Applications , 6(1):2–10, 2018. [37] Lillian Pentecost, Alexander Hankin, Marco Donato, Mark Hempstead, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. Nvmexplorer: A framework for cross-stack comparisons of embedded non-volatile memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01188 , 2021. [38] Ben Perach, Ronny Ronen, Benny Kimelfeld, and Shahar Kvatinsky. Understanding bulk-bitwise processing in-memory through database analytics. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing , 2023. [39] Ananth Krishna Prasad, Morteza Rezaalipour, Masoud Dehyadegari, and Mahdi Nazm Bojnordi. Memristive data ranking. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE, 2021. [40] Ali Shafiee, Anirban Nag, Naveen Muralimanohar, Rajeev Balasub-ramonian, John Paul Strachan, Miao Hu, R Stanley Williams, and Vivek Srikumar. Isaac: A convolutional neural network accelerator with in-situ analog arithmetic in crossbars. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News , 44(3):14–26, 2016. [41] Anshumali Shrivastava and Ping Li. Asymmetric lsh (alsh) for sublin-ear time maximum inner product search (mips), 2014. [42] Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, George Williams, Martin Aumüller, Matthijs Douze, Artem Babenko, Dmitry Baranchuk, Qi Chen, Lucas Hosseini, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, Gopal Srinivasa, Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, and Jingdong Wang. Results of the neurips’21 challenge on billion-scale approximate nearest neighbor search, 2022. [43] Aditi Singh, Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, and Harsha Vardhan Simhadri. Freshdiskann: A fast and accurate graph-based ann index for streaming similarity search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09613 , 2021. [44] T. Srimani, G. Hills, M. Bishop, C. Lau, P. Kanhaiya, R. Ho, A. Amer, M. Chao, A. Yu, A. Wright, A. Ratkovich, D. Aguilar, A. Bramer, C. Cec-man, A. Chov, G. Clark, G. Michaelson, M. Johnson, K. Kelley, P. Manos, K. Mi, U. Suriono, S. Vuntangboon, H. Xue, J. Humes, S. Soares, B. Jones, S. Burack, Arvind, A. Chandrakasan, B. Ferguson, M. Nelson, and M. M. Shulaker. Heterogeneous integration of beol logic and memory in a commercial foundry: Multi-tier complementary carbon nanotube logic and resistive ram at a 130 nm node. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology , pages 1–2, 2020. [45] S Jayaram Subramanya, Fnu Devvrit, HV Simhadri, Ravishankar Krish-nawamy, and R Kadekodi. Diskann: Fast accurate billion-point nearest neighbor search on a single node. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32:13771–13781, 2019. [46] Ján Suchal and Pavol Návrat. Full text search engine as scalable k-nearest neighbor recommendation system. In IFIP International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Theory and Practice , pages 165– 173. Springer, 2010. [47] Yao Tian, Xi Zhao, and Xiaofang Zhou. Db-lsh 2.0: Locality-sensitive hashing with query-based dynamic bucketing. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 2023. [48] Minh SQ Truong, Eric Chen, Deanyone Su, Liting Shen, Alexander Glass, L Richard Carley, James A Bain, and Saugata Ghose. Racer: Bit-pipelined processing using resistive memory. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture , pages 100–116, 2021. [49] Dan Vanderkam, Rob Schonberger, Henry Rowley, and Sanjiv Kumar. Nearest neighbor search in google correlate. 2013. [50] Jianguo Wang, Xiaomeng Yi, Rentong Guo, Hai Jin, Peng Xu, Shengjun Li, Xiangyu Wang, Xiangzhou Guo, Chengming Li, Xiaohai Xu, Kun Yu, Yuxing Yuan, Yinghao Zou, Jiquan Long, Yudong Cai, Zhenxiang 

> 13

Li, Zhifeng Zhang, Yihua Mo, Jun Gu, Ruiyi Jiang, Yi Wei, and Charles Xie. Milvus: A purpose-built vector data management system. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data ,SIGMOD ’21, page 2614–2627, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. [51] Mengzhao Wang, Xiaoliang Xu, Qiang Yue, and Yuxiang Wang. A comprehensive survey and experimental comparison of graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12631 ,2021. [52] Weijie Wang, Victor Yi-Qqian Zhuo, Zhixian Chen, Hock Koon Lee, Minghua Li, and Wendong Song. Enabling neuromorphic computing: Beol integration of cmos rram chip and programmable performance. In 2019 32nd IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC) ,pages 354–358, 2019. [53] Ming-Chi Wu, Yi-Wei Lin, Wen-Yueh Jang, Chen-Hsi Lin, and Tseung-Yuen Tseng. Low-Power and Highly Reliable Multilevel Operation in ZrO 2 1T1R RRAM. IEEE Electron Device Letters , 32(8):1026–1028, 2011. [54] Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul Bennett, Junaid Ahmed, and Arnold Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00808 , 2020. [55] Cong Xu, Dimin Niu, Naveen Muralimanohar, Rajeev Balasubramo-nian, Tao Zhang, Shimeng Yu, and Yuan Xie. Overcoming the chal-lenges of crossbar resistive memory architectures. In 2015 IEEE 21st International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , pages 476–488. IEEE, 2015. [56] Tiancheng Xu, Boyuan Tian, and Yuhao Zhu. Tigris: Architecture and algorithms for 3d perception in point clouds. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture ,pages 629–642, 2019. [57] Cui Yu, Rui Zhang, Yaochun Huang, and Hui Xiong. High-dimensional knn joins with incremental updates. Geoinformatica , 14(1):55, 2010. [58] Geng Yuan, Payman Behnam, Zhengang Li, Ali Shafiee, Sheng Lin, Xiaolong Ma, Hang Liu, Xuehai Qian, Mahdi Nazm Bojnordi, Yanzhi Wang, et al. Forms: Fine-grained polarized reram-based in-situ com-putation for mixed-signal dnn accelerator. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) ,pages 265–278. IEEE, 2021. [59] Mahmoud Zangeneh and Ajay Joshi. Design and optimization of nonvolatile multibit 1t1r resistive ram. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , 22(8):1815–1828, 2014. [60] Jialiang Zhang, Soroosh Khoram, and Jing Li. Efficient large-scale approximate nearest neighbor search on opencl fpga. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 4924–4932, 2018. [61] Bolong Zheng, Zhao Xi, Lianggui Weng, Nguyen Quoc Viet Hung, Hang Liu, and Christian S Jensen. Pm-lsh: A fast and accurate lsh framework for high-dimensional approximate nn search. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 13(5):643–655, 2020.