Title: Explicit State and Resource Contracts for Low-Precision Pipeline Parallel Training under Captured Graphs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.23536v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 01:28:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Explicit State and Resource Contracts for Low-Precision Pipeline Parallel Training under Captured Graphs 

Genlang Chen *

NingboTech University cgl@zju.edu.cn 

Junyi Zhu 

Dalian Ocean University junyizhu.cs@gmail.com 

Abstract —Graph capture mechanisms such as CUDA Graphs amortize host launch latency and framework overhead by replaying predetermined execution plans over fixed device virtual addresses. In low-precision floating-point (FP8) pipeline-parallel training, however, these invariant memory buffers correspond to continuously shifting runtime entities: evolving delayed-scaling factors, distinct microbatch activations, and asynchronously deferred backward tasks. Advanced split-backward schedules (e.g., 1F1B and Zero-Bubble) decouple input-gradient ( 𝑑𝐼 ) from weight-gradient ( 𝑑𝑊 ) passes to diminish pipeline bubbles, but this separation disrupts traditional stack-disciplined resource lifecycles. Standard computational dataflow graphs encode tensor dependencies while remaining oblivious to internal numerical state transitions, non-LIFO work ownership, and weight-cache lifetimes—frequently inducing latent race conditions and silent numerical corruption during concurrent graph replay. In this paper, we establish an explicit state and resource contract system (QEffect) that bridges the semantic gap between graph capture and stateful, low-precision pipeline training. QEffect formalizes four foundational runtime invariants: (1) temporal serialization of hidden quantization state, (2) generational ownership of retained backward resources, (3) validity versioning for cached weights across optimizer boundaries, and (4) bidirectional completion synchronization between caller streams and graph executors. These invariants uniformly govern both eager execution and captured graph replay, while allowing volatile graph-scoped resources to be cleanly recreated upon checkpoint restoration. Leveraging rigorous work-ownership contracts, we further design an affine direct-gradient placement mechanism that completely bypasses intermediate gradient staging. Implemented atop TorchTitan and NVIDIA Transformer Engine, our runtime maintains strict bitwise parity with native full-backward baselines across delayed-scaling rollover events, deterministically intercepts cross-stream ordering anomalies, and guarantees error-free cold restart. Microbenchmarks on NVIDIA H800 GPUs demonstrate that graph capture accelerates transformer layers by 1.82–2.79 ×

relative to eager execution, while direct gradient placement secures an additional 1.132 × throughput improvement by pruning 96 redundant tensor transfers per rank per step. 

I. Introduction While computational graphs effectively model tensor dataflow among operators, modern training runtimes increas-ingly rely on hidden numerical state transitions and out-of-order deferred tasks. This semantic gap becomes acute when low-precision arithmetic, pipeline scheduling, and graph replay intersect. Delayed scaling dynamically adjusts scaling factors 

> *

Corresponding author: cgl@zju.edu.cn 

to keep FP8 arithmetic numerically stable [1], [2]. Pipeline runtimes split backward passes into separate input-gradient (𝑑𝐼 ) and weight-gradient ( 𝑑𝑊 ) stages to minimize pipeline bubbles [3], [4]. CUDA Graphs eliminate Python interpreter and kernel-launch overheads by replaying fixed execution plans over static addresses [5], [6], [7]. While each technique is sound within its isolated domain, their runtime interfaces fail to jointly specify hidden numerical state, asynchronous lifetimes, and retained work. NVIDIA Transformer Engine (TE) exemplifies this interface mismatch. An individual layer encapsulates absolute-maximum (amax) histories, dynamic scaling factors, and quantized-weight caches behind an opaque tensor interface. Its backward pass also retains intermediate activations intended for subsequent weight-gradient evaluation. Conventional autograd engines rely on strict last-in, first-out (LIFO) stack discipline to associate retained work with the corresponding forward execution. Zero-Bubble pipelining breaks this assumption: multiple micro-batches remain concurrently active, 𝑑𝐼 updates shared scaling state, and the matching 𝑑𝑊 may execute out of order after an arbitrary schedule delay. CUDA Graph replay introduces further complications: static memory addresses are reused while their underlying logical microbatches and weight versions continuously evolve. Consequently, an execution graph can appear structurally complete under pure tensor dataflow while omitting four indispensable relations for correct runtime execution. Specif-ically, the runtime must capture the topological sequence of hidden numerical updates, the explicit ownership and lifetime of retained work, the freshness of cached weights, and the completion of asynchronous device streams. These orthogonal properties cannot be collapsed into a monolithic dependency token. A scalar token enforces sequential execution order but cannot identify a deferred resource; an identifier names a resource but cannot order updates to shared scaling state. Compiler intermediate representations (IRs) traditionally em-ploy tokens and abstract resource types to sequence side effects [8], [9], [10]. NVIDIA enables persistent FP8 buffers and weight caching for CUDA Graphs under restricted Megatron schedules [11]. GraCE broadens graph coverage via parameter indirection and selective capture [7], while Zero Bubble defines split-backward pipelining [4]. While foundational, arXiv:2609.23536v1 [cs.DC] 20 Sep 2026 none of these systems reconciles hidden scaling state, non-LIFO retained work, cache versioning, stream synchronization, and failure recovery within a unified stage interface. We designate our approach QEffect because it elevates quantization-related side effects—including FP8 delayed-scaling state updates, quantized-weight cache invalidations, and deferred low-precision gradient tasks—into first-class, verifiable runtime contracts. QEffect enforces strict ordering on hidden numerical updates and binds each retained backward resource to a unique logical action and physical generation. It tracks cache validity across optimizer epochs and establishes bidirectional synchronization between caller and graph streams upon every replay. Quiescent checkpointing serializes logical and numerical state only when all in-flight work has settled, enabling ephemeral graph, stream, and tape objects to be rebuilt cleanly upon restart. For TE TransformerLayers, an affine direct-placement optimization exploits retained-work ownership to write delayed matrix gradients directly into stable per-microbatch memory arenas, eliminating high-volume memory copies without altering numerical results. Figure 1 illustrates how these contracts compose across stages. The work makes three principal contributions:  

> •

We identify and formalize four relations that tensor dataflow graphs omit in captured, split-backward pipelines: state order, retained-work ownership, weight version, and device completion. In an unconstrained baseline path, 200 producer–consumer checks across three independent processes consistently reveal stale reads in all 600 trials.  

> •

We design and implement the QEffect contract in TorchTi-tan GraphPP. The runtime supports multiple outstanding microbatches, non-LIFO 𝑑𝑊 scheduling, static-address graph replay, and robust checkpoint resumption from quiescent optimizer boundaries.  

> •

We comprehensively validate QEffect against native-TE full-backward references through fault injection, check-point/resume verification, causal Nsight profiling, resource scaling, and pipeline mapping studies. Captured TE paths are 1.82–2.79 × faster than native eager execution, while direct gradient placement delivers an additional 1.138 ×

speedup on Ada and 1.132 × on Hopper. II. Background and Motivation 

A. Temporal Latency and Hidden State in Delayed Scaling 

FP8 formats trade exponent and mantissa range for com-putational throughput and memory bandwidth [1]. To avoid underflow and saturation, delayed scaling computes scaling factors from moving absolute-maximum (amax) histories rather than synchronously inspecting every operand tensor. A module invocation therefore reads persistent scaling state, executes quantized matrix multiplication, and updates internal statistics for subsequent microbatches. Quantized weights may addition-ally be cached across microbatch boundaries and refreshed only during the initial forward pass following an optimizer step. Consequently, the conventional tensor operator signature 

𝑌 = 𝑓 (𝑋, 𝑊 ) completely omits both the internal numerical state transition and the validity invariants of cached weight representations. NVIDIA’s CUDA Graph integration makes these internal buffers persistent and serializes deferred updates for sup-ported Megatron-LM schedules [11]. However, split-backward pipelining demands a strictly stronger interface because its numerical state transitions and retained gradient computations are scheduled asynchronously. While static scaling alternatives circumvent dynamic state updates [12], QEffect specifically targets dynamic and delayed scaling. 

B. Non-LIFO Lifetimes in Split-Backward Pipelining 

Conventional pipeline schedules treat backward propagation as an atomic stage action. Zero-Bubble pipelining observes that input gradients ( 𝑑𝐼 ) lie on the critical latency path of the pipeline bubble, whereas weight gradients ( 𝑑𝑊 ) can be safely deferred to bubble regions [4]. At 𝑑𝐼 (𝑘 ), the runtime reads saved activations from forward microbatch 𝑘 and queues intermediate tasks that a subsequent 𝑑𝑊 (𝑘 ) must evaluate. Because arbitrary microbatches may interleave between 𝑑𝐼 (𝑘 )

and 𝑑𝑊 (𝑘 ), weight-gradient evaluations violate standard LIFO deallocation order. Retained backward state must therefore carry an explicit, collision-free identity that survives across graph captures and replayed invocations. 

C. Semantic Invalidity Under Asynchronous Stream Execution 

CUDA Graph capture records device kernels on a dedicated stream and replays them against fixed virtual memory addresses. In GraphPP, a pipeline stage captured on an internal graph stream was replayed from caller streams without re-establishing device-level happens-before edges. While replay returned stable output tensor handles to the host runtime, subsequent graphs or kernels could access shared state buffers and weight caches before prior device replays finalized. Parameters and delayed-scaling states silently diverged across microbatches even while loss curves remained finite. Figure 2 contrasts this defective one-way handoff against bidirectional stream synchronization. We validate both pro-tocols across three independent fresh processes executing 200 producer–consumer checks each. The unconstrained one-way protocol triggers data-race hazards and stale reads in all 600 checks because the host proceeds before device replay completes. In contrast, the two-way protocol enforces a dual handshake: the graph stream waits on the incoming caller stream before replay, and the caller stream synchronizes with a recorded graph-tail event prior to consumption. This eliminates all 600 data races. Correct graph replay must therefore preserve runtime seman-tic contracts and device completion, not merely tensor shapes and memory pointers. 

D. Insufficiency of Monolithic Dependency Tokens 

While an opaque scalar token can serialize execution order, temporal sequencing addresses only a fraction of the problem. A deferred pipeline action must also bind to the exact retained schedule time 

> Microbatch 0 Microbatch 1
> same captured actions, different logical microbatches

Split schedule     

> Forward Input grad Weight grad
> Forward Input grad Weight grad
> retained work retained work

(a) 

> FP8 state order Retained-work owner Weight/cache version Caller/graph completion

Four QEffect relations 

> F → dI microbatch m current weights replay complete

(b) 

> Direct gradients

Safe completion  

> m0 m1
> Reduce
> Optimizer update
> Restart after completion

(c) Fig. 1. How QEffect preserves a split pipeline action across schedule delay and graph replay. State order, retained-work ownership, weight version, and device completion connect each logical action to the correct state and destination. The detailed mechanisms are a device token, TapeKey /TapeRef , weight/cache versions, and caller–graph events. Caller Graph State 

input replay 

replay 

state write graph tail 

No input wait No completion 

consume too early stale read 

Data races: 600/600 

One-way handoff (Unsynchronized) 

(a) 

Caller Graph State 

input replay 

replay 

state write graph tail 

Input wait Completion event 

consume 

Data races: 0/600 

Two-way handoff (Synchronized) 

(b) 

Fig. 2. Caller-stream safety requires bidirectional synchronization. The unsynchronized one-way path returns control while a downstream consumer reads state before replay completes (producing data races in all 600 trials). In the synchronized two-way path, the graph stream waits for caller input and the caller waits for graph completion (eliminating all 600 data races). 

work it consumes, verify that cached parameters reflect the latest optimizer commit, and synchronize asynchronous device streams. Collapsing all stage dependencies into a single monolithic token introduces false serialization dependencies and cripples pipeline concurrency while leaving resource ownership implicit. Table I maps each hidden runtime object to its required contractual relation. QEffect unifies state serialization, retained-work ownership, cache versioning, and stream completion at the stage boundary. Checkpointing applies these same relations to cleanly decouple persistent model states from ephemeral, process-local runtime structures. Checkpointing composes the same relations. It waits for retained work and device operations to complete, persists FP8 state and weight versions, and assigns new process-local identities to rebuilt tapes, events, and caches. III. QEffect Contract QEffect formalizes a pipeline stage as three disjoint operator actions: forward ( 𝐹 ), input-gradient computation ( 𝑑𝐼 ), and weight-gradient computation ( 𝑑𝑊 ). Prior to executing an action, the contract determines which hidden state transition occurs, which retained backward work belongs to the action, which parameter version its cache represents, and whether preceding asynchronous device operations have finalized. Identical tensor operator signatures and validation rules govern both eager execution and prebuilt CUDA Graphs. 

A. Naming retained work 

Static virtual memory addresses in captured graphs cannot identify dynamic training iterations because identical physical slots are recycled across microbatches and optimizer epochs. QEffect therefore identifies each stage execution via an affine invocation key: 

𝐾 = TapeKey (𝑒, 𝑠, 𝑚, 𝑢, 𝑖 ), (1) where 𝑒 denotes the optimizer epoch, 𝑠 the pipeline stage, 𝑚 the microbatch index, 𝑢 the sub-layer block (e.g., attention or MLP), and 𝑖 an intra-module invocation counter. This logical identifier is strictly decoupled from physical device buffer locations. Because CUDA Graph execution precludes dynamic tensor allocations during replay, physical storage is provisioned via a bounded slot pool. Allocating a tape in slot 𝑝 increments a monotonically increasing generation counter 𝑔 𝑝 and yields an affine reference: 

𝑅 = TapeRef ( 𝑝, 𝑔 𝑝 ). (2) TABLE I Four relations omitted by ordinary tensor dataflow and the mechanism that represents each relation in QEffect. Relation Hidden object Failure without the relation QEffect mechanism Order FP8 scaling state duplicated, skipped, or reordered scale update device token and persistent FP8 state Ownership retained 𝑑𝑊 work wrong microbatch or a reference to a reused slot logical action identity and generation-checked reference Version quantized-weight cache a fixed address represents stale weights separate weight and cache versions; first-forward refresh Completion caller and graph streams a consumer observes a partially updated state caller-to-graph wait and graph-to-caller completion event 

The active mapping is strictly injective: each logical key maps to at most one live physical tape, and an occupied slot cannot be preempted. A consuming operator must present both the logical key and the exact expected generation. Releasing a slot evicts its tensor payload while preserving the monotonic progression of 𝑔 𝑝 , provably eliminating use-after-free or ABA-style stale accesses upon address reuse. Each tape tracks consumer completion via an internal bitmask. The pool traps duplicate consumer invocations and re-leases physical storage only after both 𝑑𝐼 and 𝑑𝑊 have executed successfully. Runtime exceptions abort the affected reference, and an aborted step purges outstanding tapes associated with epoch 𝑒 .

B. Ordering hidden state 

Captured operators sequence hidden numerical effects by threading an explicit scalar device token. This token carries no numerical tensors; its sole purpose is to enforce device-level topological ordering among stateful kernels. For microbatch 

𝑚 , the state transition is defined by: 

(𝑌 𝑚 , 𝑆 1, 𝑇 𝑚 ) = 𝐹 (𝑋 𝑚 , 𝑊, 𝑆 0), (3) 

(𝑑𝑋 𝑚 , 𝐵 𝑚 , 𝑆 2, 𝑄 𝑚 ) = 𝑑𝐼 (𝑑𝑌 𝑚 , 𝑇 𝑚 , 𝑆 1), (4) 

𝑑𝑊 𝑚 = 𝑑𝑊 (𝑄 𝑚 ), (5) where 𝑆 represents delayed-scaling internal state, 𝑇 𝑚 is the forward activation tape, 𝐵 𝑚 contains non-matrix parameter gradients, and 𝑄 𝑚 denotes retained matrix-gradient tasks. TE quantizes incoming output gradients and updates the backward amax history exactly once during 𝑑𝐼 . The subsequent 𝑑𝑊 

consumes 𝑄 𝑚 without re-executing this update. The effect token therefore enforces *when* a state transition occurs, while the tape reference determines *which* microbatch owns the deferred computation. 

C. Tracking weight versions 

QEffect maintains a logical optimizer epoch 𝑒 𝑊 and a quantized-weight cache epoch 𝑒 𝐶 . An optimizer commit advances 𝑒 𝑊 only after all backward tapes, arena writes, and dis-tributed reductions have finalized. Every forward action requires parameter epoch consistency ( 𝑒 𝑊 ). The initial microbatch of a step refreshes the quantized TE cache and synchronizes 

𝑒 𝐶 ← 𝑒 𝑊 ; subsequent microbatches verify cache freshness against this version. Following an optimizer step or process restart, stale caches are automatically refreshed during the first forward pass. The captured graph maintains fixed process-local pointers while GraphPP advances the logical epoch. Fixed addresses can thus represent successive training iterations without permitting stale parameter reuse. 

D. Optional direct gradient placement 

Surfacing matrix gradients across custom CUDA Graph operator boundaries introduces an aliasing challenge: TE frequently exposes views into internal accumulation buffers, whereas custom-operator graph interfaces require independent output tensors. A conservative reference implementation clones these gradients, but at hidden size 4,096, this extraneous memory copy can nullify the latency benefits of graph capture. To circumvent this penalty, QEffect allocates a dedicated matrix-gradient arena providing stable preallocated views for each matrix parameter and configured microbatch. Prior to invoking 𝑑𝑊 (𝑚 ), the runtime binds these views directly as the TE main_grad accumulation targets, enabling fused in-kernel gradient accumulation. The custom CUDA Graph operator mutates the prebound arena in place and returns solely its effect token. Runtime assertions strictly validate tensor shape, data type, device ID, and data_ptr for every bound destination. Microbatch 0 initializes the accumulation buffer; subsequent microbatches write according to the pipeline’s arbitrary non-LIFO schedule. Duplicate, missing, or aliased writes trigger immediate failures. Finalization mandates that every configured microbatch writes exactly once prior to optimizer commit. Direct placement alters only the physical destination of 𝑑𝑊 ,leaving the underlying numerical state machine intact. The unoptimized copied-gradient path shares the identical four correctness contracts without utilizing the arena. 

E. Restarting after pending work completes 

Checkpoints are serialized exclusively when no active tapes, arena writes, or distributed reductions remain in flight. QEffect serializes TE numerical state, logical optimizer epochs, cache semantics, precision recipes, and static configurations. Graph objects, device streams, CUDA events, tape generations, arena addresses, effect tokens, and cache contents are treated as ephemeral process-local state and are reconstructed upon restart. Resumption restores numerical state prior to graph instantiation and invalidates weight caches to guarantee a clean refresh on the initial forward pass. F. Contract invariants 

QEffect enforces four foundational invariants across stage boundaries: 

Invariant 1 (Temporal Serialization). State-mutating forward and input-gradient passes advance an explicit scalar effect token. Numerical scaling updates are performed strictly once per forward-backward cycle; delayed 𝑑𝑊 execution never re-executes or perturbs scaling state. 

Invariant 2 (Generational Ownership). Each active TapeKey 

binds to exactly one physical tape slot, guarded by a mono-tonically incrementing generation counter 𝑔 𝑝 . Dereferencing verifies generation equality, preventing stale reads and ABA hazards across slot reuse. 

Invariant 3 (Cache Freshness). Forward invocations validate parameter epoch consistency ( 𝑒 𝐶 = 𝑒 𝑊 ). The initial microbatch following an optimizer step forces an in-place weight cache refresh, after which subsequent microbatches verify cache currency. 

Invariant 4 (Quiescent Persistence). Checkpointing occurs exclusively when all active tapes, arena writes, and gradient reductions have resolved. Persistent numerical state is serialized alongside logical epochs, while all ephemeral device handles are cleanly reconstructed upon restart. IV. Runtime Integration We implement QEffect in TorchTitan GraphTrainer and GraphPP [13]. The runtime wraps a TE 

TransformerLayer with delayed scaling and connects it to the language model, optimizer, pipeline communication, optional data-parallel reduction, and PyTorch Distributed Checkpoint (DCP) [14]. 

A. Extracting F, 𝑑𝐼 , and 𝑑𝑊 

F runs the TE layer under FP8 autocast and creates a retained 

WeightGradStore for each matrix-operation domain. It copies dynamic inputs into fixed graph buffers, gives autograd a distinct retained input, and binds the input, output, and stores to the slot named by 𝐾 .

𝑑𝐼 resolves the corresponding TapeRef , checks its key and epoch, and uses autograd to compute the input gradient and ten non-matrix parameter gradients. TE leaves the six matrix gradients as deferred work in four stores. After all four stores are ready, 𝑑𝐼 consumes its part of the tape. Later, 𝑑𝑊 resolves the same generation, drains the stores, and checks that each matrix parameter is covered exactly once. The copied-gradient path returns independent gradients; the direct-placement path checks the bound buffers and returns only the ordering token. Thus all 16 stage parameters are accounted for before the optimizer step. The three actions are CUDA custom operators with explicit tensor signatures. One F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 triple is bound to each fixed tape slot and is shared by eager and CUDA Graph execution. Algorithm 1 gives the optimizer-step protocol in schedule order. A check precedes its physical action, and the corresponding transition is committed only after that action succeeds. 

Algorithm 1 QEffect protocol for one optimizer step.                                     

> Require: Pipeline-scheduled actions for the current weight version 1: for each action 𝑎 in schedule order do
> 2: if 𝑎 is Forward then
> 3: Check the weight/cache version and run F 4: Bind retained work to the logical action; advance FP8-state order 5: else if 𝑎 is Input grad then
> 6: Check action identity, generation, and weight version 7: Run 𝑑𝐼 ; require delayed 𝑑𝑊 work; complete the 𝑑𝐼 ownership 8: else if 𝑎 is Weight grad then
> 9: Resolve the same generation and run 𝑑𝑊
> 10: If direct placement is enabled, check each bound destination 11: Complete the 𝑑𝑊 ownership 12: end if
> 13: end for
> 14: Finish reductions and require no pending retained work 15: Require complete direct destinations when enabled; update parameters and version
> Restart rule: load FP8 state and versions, rebuild process-local resources, and refresh the weight cache on the first forward.

B. GraphPP schedules 

GraphPP already expresses stage forward and split backward. QEffect replaces the stage body with the checked actions and carries (𝐾, 𝑅 ) in its saved-value edge. Interleaved 1F1B and ZB-V use the same implementation; only the event order changes. The logical pool can hold several stage-boundary tapes, and a 𝑑𝑊 verifies that both its explicit microbatch index and its reference name the same slot. This supports multiple outstanding microbatches and delayed, non-LIFO 𝑑𝑊 without relying on a module-global backward stack. The last stage may use either a stateful TE FP8 output head or a dynamic TorchAO Float8Linear boundary. TorchAO exercises the same stage interface, while the retained delayed-scaling path is implemented and evaluated with TE. 

C. Static binding and resource cost 

Prebuilding actions turns dynamic schedule identities into a bounded mapping. For 𝑀 microbatches and 𝐿 𝑟 local stage chunks on rank 𝑟 , the core creates one graph for each F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 

action, 

𝐺 𝑟 = 3𝑀 𝐿 𝑟 . (6) For 𝑀 = 2, 4, 8, 16 and two local chunks, this gives the measured 12, 24, 48, and 96 graphs. These counts describe provisioned capacity. A schedule may keep far fewer tapes live at once. The matrix arena has the corresponding capacity 

𝐴 𝑟 = 𝑀 ∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈ W 𝑟

sizeof (𝑊 𝑗 ), (7) where W𝑟 contains the local matrix parameters. The arena is both reserved storage and the optimizer-visible gradient destination. It uses predictable memory to remove repeated full-gradient copies while keeping every address fixed for capture. This static binding does not require the schedule to execute all 𝑑𝑊 actions in slot order. The stage initializes accumulation with microbatch 0, as required by TE’s fused accumulation path, then accepts the remaining microbatches in the schedule order. Logical identity and generation checks remain active even though the selected callable is indexed by a static slot. 

D. Capture and replay 

Warmup, dynamic-input copies, capture, and replay all run on one manager-owned graph stream. At every invocation the graph stream waits on the current caller stream. An external CUDA event is recorded at the graph tail during capture, and the caller waits on it after every replay. Static parameters and tape-slot buffers retain their addresses; dynamic input tensors are copied only after the caller-to-graph edge. The implementation records capture host time, graph count, replay count, caller/graph handoffs, arena capacity, and persistent memory growth so setup and steady-state costs remain distinct. 

E. Optimizer and failure boundaries 

The optimizer commit establishes a cluster-wide consistency barrier. GraphPP verifies that all backward tapes, arena destina-tions, and asynchronous data-parallel reductions are completely resolved before parameter updates occur. The split module, output projection head, gradient arena, and gradient reducer then advance synchronously to the subsequent logical epoch. If any action encounters an exception or validation failure, outstanding tapes are immediately aborted and partially updated arenas are flagged unusable for that epoch. V. Evaluation We first check whether QEffect preserves numerical and runtime state across split backward, graph replay, and fresh-process restart, and compare its semantics with the official TE and Megatron paths. We then measure complete optimizer steps, isolate the effect of direct gradient placement, and study setup, memory, resource capacity, and pipeline mapping. 

A. Methodology 

Hardware and software. Performance runs use two or four NVIDIA H800 PCIe GPUs and either two or four RTX 5880 Ada GPUs. All directly compared ranks have peer-to-peer communication. The common stack is a source PyTorch build ( 2.15.0a0+git411c2b5 ), CUDA 12.8, TE 2.18, and the NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL). The dynamic output-head experiment uses TorchAO 0.18 development code. Every directly compared configuration loads the same serialized parameter state and data sequence. 

Workloads. The evaluation examines configurations with hidden, feed-forward, and sequence dimensions of 2,048 / 8,192 / 256 across four microbatches, and 4,096 / 11,008 / 256 across eight microbatches. We denote pipeline, data, and virtual pipeline-parallel degrees by PP, DP, and VPP, respectively. The primary performance cells deploy PP = 2with four virtual stage chunks. Both configurations contain four TransformerLayers (one per virtual stage), 16/32 attention heads, and a 32,768-token vocabulary. The scaling benchmark holds the four-stage hidden-4,096 model and 2,048 global tokens constant while transitioning from two local chunks per rank at PP = 2 to one chunk at PP = 4. Unless noted otherwise, microbatch size is one with sequence length 256. We intentionally evaluate this fine-grained, overhead-dominated regime as an adversarial worst-case stress test: in compute-bound settings with long sequences, runtime and launch overheads are masked by Tensor Cores; conversely, fine-grained pipeline chunks accentuate graph launch latencies, stream handoff stalls, and memory aliasing bottlenecks. Training uses AdamW on a pinned 2,000-record C4 asset [15] (1,600 training and 400 held-out records); synthetic inputs are used for bit-exact state verification. The resource analysis varies microbatches across {2, 4, 8, 16 } under a fixed model shape. 

Timing and statistics. The primary metric is the maximum optimizer-step wall time across ranks after lazy initialization, warmup, compilation, capture, and optimizer-state materializa-tion. A fresh process is one trial. We report the initial trial set (𝑛 = 3) and an independent replication set ( 𝑛 = 2) separately using medians. Setup-to-break-even uses paired initialization-plus-first-step and steady-state measurements; instrumented profiler runs are excluded from timing. 

Baselines. Native TE eager uses Interleaved 1F1B with full autograd backward. The QEffect eager path and the captured Interleaved paths with copied gradients or direct placement use the same split F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 schedule. Captured ZB-V uses direct placement and changes only the schedule order. All absolute-time comparisons between QEffect and native TE share model state, data, optimizer, precision recipe, and complete-step boundary. We also audit TE make_graphed_callables 

and a pinned native Megatron-LM revision. Megatron perfor-mance is reported as a within-framework graph/eager ratio. 

State comparison. Each shape/backend pair uses a stage-indexed parameter snapshot that loads identical tensors indepen-dently of the rank-to-stage mapping. Data, FP8 recipe, optimizer, learning rate, input placement, warmup, and stopping rule are fixed within each comparison. We compare loss, parameters, gradients, optimizer state, FP8 scaling state, cache versions, resource counts, and persistent memory growth. 

Reproducibility records. Schema-checked JSON reports retain the configuration, raw measurements, and resource counts used by every figure and table. The artifact includes these reports, validation scripts, and rendering inputs. 

B. Semantic capability and correctness 

Table II reports only behavior exercised by the audits and experiments. Native TE eager is the matched numerical and complete-step reference. TE’s standalone graphed full backward passes at module scope, but its integrated PP path produces nonfinite first-step gradients and is excluded from timing. Native Megatron’s TE graph path runs under PP=2/VPP=2 delayed scaling. Its delayed weight-gradient option requires mixture-of-experts (MoE) overlap, so the dense PP/VPP request stops before training. At PP=1, all four official Megatron capture modes complete with the same six-significant-digit loss. Under PP=2/VPP=2, eager and transformer_engine pass, whereas local 

fails at output-view deallocation and full_iteration fails on a second-step static-input copy. Dense delayed 𝑑𝑊 is TABLE II Observed scope and role of the baseline and QEffect paths. The Megatron delayed-𝑑𝑊 row records the dense PP/VPP request that stops before training. Path Graph scope Backward schedule Observed result Role in evaluation Native TE eager Eager; no graph Full autograd backward Completes the matched correctness and timing runs Numerical and complete-step reference Standalone TE module graph Standalone module; PP integration probed Full backward in the standalone probe Standalone probe passes; PP integration has nonfinite first-step gradients Compatibility control Megatron TE graph PP=2/VPP=2 Full backward Loss matches eager; 1.751–2.191 × within Megatron Official graph control Megatron delayed           

> 𝑑𝑊
> Dense PP/VPP request Delayed 𝑑𝑊 requested Rejected before training; requires MoE overlap Scope control QEffect Interleaved PP=2/4 stage graphs Split F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 ;schedule-defined 𝑑𝑊
> Zero state mismatches; exact restart Evaluated system QEffect ZB-V PP=2 stage graphs Split F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 ; non-LIFO
> 𝑑𝑊
> Zero state mismatches; exact restart Evaluated system

unavailable in this revision because it requires the MoE expert-overlap path. For the supported graph path, three paired trials give 107.70 versus 51.05 ms at hidden size 2,048 and 228.45 versus 133.05 ms at hidden size 4,096. The median paired speedups are 2.191 × and 1.751 ×, respectively. All 20 logged losses match their eager trajectories at the reported precision; these ratios remain within Megatron. Table III summarizes the state checks. Each 20-step run uses native TE full backward as the reference for the corresponding QEffect eager or captured schedule and crosses the four-entry amax-history rollover. At each microbatch action and optimizer step, we compare F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 tensors, gradients, parameters, AdamW state, FP8 scaling state, and cache contents. We also check addresses, epochs, and pending resources required by the contract. All mismatch counts are zero. A fresh-process DCP run saves at step 3 and continues through step 8 for eager/captured × Interleaved/ZB-V. Persistent state and subsequent data batches match uninterrupted execution; process-local tokens and addresses are rebuilt after restart. The contract also exposes invalid transitions at a precise host boundary. Seven CPU-only injections cover the six violation families in Table IV; the process initializes no CUDA context. Every injection is rejected at its first invalid operation. A rejected stale reference preserves the current tape, incomplete work remains uncommitted, and failed gradient-buffer or reduction versions require rebuilding the affected runtime state. Within each QEffect/native TE pair, cloned parameters and inputs allow exact tensor fingerprints at every microbatch action and optimizer step. The resume test compares each restarted suffix with uninterrupted execution under the same schedule. Megatron’s standard log exposes six significant digits of loss, so its graph/eager trajectory is compared at that precision. QEffect runtime state occupies only 23 ,969 bytes within a 278 ,484 ,866-byte DCP checkpoint. Four 5 ,677-byte stage payloads and a 1 ,261-byte schema payload retain FP8 state, weight versions, and persistent configuration. The 5 ,000-step C4 pretraining trajectory satisfies the 5% perplexity non-inferiority bound alongside matched run-to-run variation. In the H800 stability verification (100 train plus 20 held-out steps), the last-ten to first-ten training cross-entropy ratios decrease steadily to 0 .4765, 0 .4545, and 0 .4514 for native TE, QEffect TE, and QEffect TorchAO, respectively, with corresponding held-out cross-entropy means of 3 .3690, 3 .0013, and 3 .0062. All three configurations demonstrate robust numerical convergence under low-precision execution. 

C. Complete-step Hopper performance 

Table V reports an initial three-trial H800 set and an independently launched two-trial replication set without pooling them. Across TE shapes, captured Interleaved is 1.884–2.792 ×

faster than native eager; captured ZB-V is 1.819–2.700 × faster. At hidden size 4,096, the TorchAO dynamic Float8 output boundary reaches 1.710–1.744 × for Interleaved and 1.653– 1.683 × for ZB-V. Schedule ordering depends on the workload: ZB-V is faster in some smaller-microbatch cells, whereas Interleaved is faster with eight microbatches at hidden size 4,096. Figure 3 shows that setup costs change the usable regime. At hidden size 4,096, Interleaved reaches estimated total-step break-even after 34.55 steps in the initial trial set and 38.53 steps in the replication set. ZB-V requires 75.77 and 91.02 steps. At hidden sizes 2,048 and 4,096, peak-memory increases are 0.438/3.357 GB for Interleaved and 0.978/4.437 GB for ZB-V. Each steady rank owns 48 prebuilt graphs and performs 96 caller/graph handoffs per step. The measured benefit therefore applies to multi-step training after these startup and memory costs. 

D. Causal attribution: direct destinations 

The five-configuration Ada matrix separates the action interface, graph capture, and gradient destination. Native eager takes 88.312 ms, QEffect eager 104.392 ms, capture with copied gradients 99.134 ms, capture with direct placement 87.107 ms, and captured ZB-V with direct placement 94.935 ms. QEffect eager is slower than native; capture recovers part of the gap, and direct placement makes the otherwise matched path 1.138 ×

faster. The paired direct/copy break-even median is 125.70 total steps, its peak allocation is 1,966,080 bytes lower, and neither path shows persistent memory growth. TABLE III Numerical and runtime-state checks. Each pipeline configuration compares QEffect with native TE full backward under the same stage mapping. Check Compared executions State compared Finding Stream ordering Fixed producer/consumer graphs; one-way versus two-way stream handoff Output, parameters, and FP8-state/cache hashes One-way path stale in all 600 checks (3 processes, 200 each); two-way path has none Stepwise state Hidden size 512, 20 steps; native TE versus QEffect eager and captured schedules Per-microbatch F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 , gradients, AdamW, FP8 state/cache, versions, addresses, and pending resources Zero mismatches in every category Pipeline mapping Hidden size 512, 20 steps; PP=2 and PP=4 captured Interleaved versus native TE under the same mapping Loss, tensors, gradients, parameters, AdamW, FP8 state/cache, versions, retained-work state, addresses, and memory growth Zero mismatches in all 28 categories at both PP degrees Fresh-process resume Save at step 3 and continue through step 8; eager/captured × Interleaved/ZB-V Model, optimizer, learning-rate state, dataloader, FP8 state, versions, cache refresh, and pending work Zero mismatches in all four configurations Data-parallel correctness PP=2 ×DP=2 with eager/captured schedules and reducers Peer gradients, parameters, runtime state, and completed resources All equality checks hold C4 training quality 5,000 train plus 100 held-out steps; native versus QEffect Held-out cross-entropy/perplexity, run variation, and unchanged validation state Meets the 5% perplexity non-inferiority criterion H800 training stability H800, 100 train plus 20 held-out steps; native TE, QEffect TE, and QEffect TorchAO Finite state, training cross-entropy ratio, and held-out cross-entropy All three trajectories remain finite and decreasing Native InterleavedZB-V  

> 20 30 40 50
> Slowest-rank step time (ms)
> 44.7 16.4 16.6

TE hidden size 2,048 

(a)  

> Native InterleavedZB-V
> 50 60 70 80 90
> ms
> 89.1 47.3 49.0

TE hidden size 4,096  

> Native InterleavedZB-V
> 50 60 70 80 90 100
> ms
> 92.3 54.0 55.9

TorchAO hidden size 4,096  

> Interleaved ZB-V
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Steps to break even

Setup cost 

> 34.6 75.8 38.5 91.0

(b) 

2,048 4,096 Hidden size 012345Memory increase (GB)  Peak memory 

> Interleaved ZB-V
> 0.438 3.357 0.978 4.437

(c)   

> initial replication bar = median

Fig. 3. H800 complete-step performance and amortization. (a) Workload-specific axes show every slowest-rank process trial and keep the initial trials (open circles, 𝑛 = 3) separate from the replication trials (filled diamonds, 𝑛 = 2); short bars mark trial-set medians. (b) Hidden-size-4,096 break-even includes initialization and the first capture-heavy step. (c) Peak allocation above native eager. TABLE IV Injected contract violations and their detection points. The final row contains separate pending-work and in-flight-reduction injections. Injected violation Detected at Result Old retained-work reference after slot reuse retained-work lookup current record preserved Repeated 𝑑𝐼 consumption ownership check duplicate rejected Finalize with one missing 

𝑑𝑊 

gradient-buffer finalization optimizer version incomplete Start a write after an aborted buffer write gradient-buffer write start version invalid; rebuild Use a stale weight cache forward version check cache refresh required Checkpoint with a live tape or reduction checkpoint serialization checkpoint withheld 

The same five-configuration decomposition on H800 uses five fresh processes per configuration and is analyzed separately from the initial and replication cohorts. Native eager, QEffect eager, capture with copied gradients, capture with direct placement, and captured ZB-V with direct placement take 94.582, 122.498, 54.126, 47.833, and 49.492 ms. QEffect eager is slower than native. Capture with copied gradients reaches 1.747 ×, and direct placement raises the speedup to 1.977 × while running 1.132 × faster than the otherwise matched copied-gradient path. The direct path wins all five copied-gradient/direct-placement pairs, reduces step time by 11.67%, and uses 1,900,544 fewer peak-allocation bytes. Capture with copied gradients, capture with direct placement, and captured ZB-V break even against native after 33.10, 30.17, and 77.99 total steps. Their peak allocations are 3.359, 3.357, and 4.437 GB above native. QEffect eager adds 3.949 GB and has no break-even because its steady step is slower. Sample coefficients of variation range from 0.17% to 1.45%, and every configuration shows zero persistent allocated-memory growth. At this hidden-size-4,096, eight-microbatch point, ZB-V is slightly slower than captured Interleaved. TABLE V Complete optimizer-step performance on two H800 PCIe GPUs. Native uses eager Interleaved 1F1B with full backward; QEffect candidates use captured split backward under the named schedule. Values are slowest-rank medians, speedups are medians of paired per-trial ratios, and the initial and replication trial sets remain separate.                                           

> Backend / hidden size Trial set ( 𝑛 )Native ms Interleaved ms Speedup ZB-V ms Speedup TE / 2,048 Initial (3) 44.887 16.184 2.792 ×16.648 2.696 ×
> TE / 2,048 Replication (2) 44.727 16.391 2.729 ×16.564 2.700 ×
> TE / 4,096 Initial (3) 89.469 47.329 1.895 ×49.025 1.824 ×
> TE / 4,096 Replication (2) 89.138 47.319 1.884 ×49.002 1.819 ×
> TorchAO / 4,096 Initial (3) 94.052 53.944 1.744 ×55.825 1.683 ×
> TorchAO / 4,096 Replication (2) 92.315 53.995 1.710 ×55.862 1.653 ×
> TABLE VI Single-node fixed-work pipeline scaling across three independent process pairs. Times are cross-trial medians; speedup is the median paired ratio.

GPU platform PP=2 ms PP=4 ms Speedup Efficiency RTX 5880 Ada 86.932 63.662 1.366 × 68.28% H800 PCIe 47.593 34.730 1.370 × 68.49% 

Matched Nsight Systems traces identify the removed work. Captured executions retain graph launches, compute, point-to-point communication, optimizer work, and stream events. The complete Ada trace records 96 matrix-gradient copies totaling 5,033,164,800 bytes and 12.320922 ms; the other Ada trace provides a 95-copy lower bound. Separate H800 traces record 96 copies per rank with copied gradients and zero under direct placement. Their projected 4.71–4.79 GB volumes and 5.64 ms durations remain lower bounds because event collection is incomplete. Profiler runs are excluded from timing results. 

E. How microbatch count changes resources 

Figure 5 varies the configured microbatches in a ZB-V step. Slowest-rank time rises from 35.124 to 175.589 ms across 2– 16 microbatches, while global throughput rises from 14.6k to 23.3k tokens/s. Graph counts grow from 12 to 96 per rank, and direct-gradient capacity grows from 1.258 to 10.066 GB. Peak allocation rises from 6.249 to 15.341 GB with zero persistent growth. Capacity and schedule pressure diverge. Although the graph and arena reserve every fixed microbatch slot, peak live tapes saturate at 3/4/4/4 while delayed 𝑑𝑊 actions grow as 2/5/9/17. Capture host time grows more sharply to 46.23/265.21/1593.84/3778.96 ms, making amortization part of configuration. 

F. Single-node pipeline mapping 

The fixed-work experiment keeps a four-stage model with hidden size 4,096, feed-forward size 11,008, sequence length 256, and 2,048 tokens per step constant. PP=2 places two stages per GPU; PP=4 places one. The PP=4 mapping reduces step time in all three pairs on both platforms, with 1.366– 1.370 × speedup and 68.28–68.49% strong-scaling efficiency (Table VI). Separate 20-step H800 runs compare PP=2 and PP=4 with native TE full backward under the same mapping; all 28 mismatch categories are zero. Comparing each mapping with its matching reference preserves the legal PP-dependent order of delayed-scaling effects. The PP=2 ×DP=2 run separately checks peer equality and reduction completion under data parallelism. VI. Discussion 

A. Effects and resources should remain distinct 

A token orders numerical updates that affect later quantiza-tion. Retained backward work also needs a clear owner and lifetime. Caches need version checks, gradient buffers need stable destinations and complete writes, and stream events mark device completion. Keeping these relations distinct preserves pipeline concurrency and reports the exact failed relation. 

B. Schedule and resource tradeoffs 

QEffect allows delayed-scaling TE to follow ZB-V’s non-LIFO 𝑑𝑊 order. Schedule choice remains workload dependent. At hidden size 4,096 with eight microbatches, Interleaved is about 1.7 ms faster and uses roughly 1.08 GB less peak memory. Smaller cells can favor ZB-V. The schedule changes overlap, live activations, delayed-𝑑𝑊 work, and graph handoffs. Provisioned graphs and direct-gradient bytes, in contrast, grow with 𝑀 even after live retained-work pressure saturates. Reusing a gradient slot would also have to preserve the main_grad address bound into its captured 𝑑𝑊 action. Schedule selection and capacity reuse are therefore optimization problems above the four correctness relations; GraCE studies the related question of graph profitability [7]. 

C. What a backend contract would need 

The four relations do not depend on TE class names. A stateful backend needs to expose its numerical transition order and the object retained between 𝑑𝐼 and 𝑑𝑊 . It must also reveal when a cached representation is current and which state survives restart. A backend with static scales or immediate 𝑑𝑊 can omit the relations it does not use. Our TE 2.18 integration obtains these hooks from its recipes, WeightGradStore , cache refresh, and fused main_grad interfaces without changing TE itself. 

D. Limitations 

The full delayed-scaling runtime is evaluated with TE; TorchAO exercises stage boundaries without internal retained Capture + gradient copy Capture + direct placement 90 95 100 

> Slowest-rank step time (ms)
> 3 paired trials
> blue line: paired median

1.138 ×

RTX 5880 (Ada) (a)    

> 0246

Copied data (GB/rank) 

> Complete profile Partial profile (lower bound) Direct placement
> 5.033 GB (12.32 ms) ≥4.943 GB (≥12.04 ms)
> 0.0 GB (0 copies/rank)

Copied matrix gradients 

> lower bound

(b)    

> Native QEffect eager Capture + copy Capture + direct ZB-V
> 1.0 1.5 2.0
> Paired speedup vs. native
> 1.000× 0.773× 1.747×
> 1.977 ×1.912 ×
> 1.132 ×; 96 →0 copies/rank

H800 speedup decomposition (c) Fig. 4. Why direct gradient placement helps. (a) Three paired Ada trials compare capture with gradient copies against capture with direct placement. (b) Direct placement removes the measured matrix-gradient copy projection; the hatched trace is a lower bound. (c) Five matched H800 trials per configuration separate native, QEffect eager, capture with copied gradients, capture with direct placement, and captured ZB-V. Short bars mark medians of the five paired speedup ratios. Separate Hopper traces record 96-to-zero copies per rank. 50 100 150 

> ms
> 176 ms

Step time 

(a)    

> 24816

Microbatches 

> 15 20
> 1,000 tokens/s
> 23.3k

Throughput    

> 24816

Microbatches 

> 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
> GB per rank
> peak 15.34 direct 10.07

Peak memory 

(b) 

> 0100
> Count  graphs: 96 records: 16

Captured and live work 

(c)         

> 024
> Live records
> 3444
> 24816
> Microbatches
> 0510 15 20
> Delayed actions
> 25917

Fig. 5. How configured microbatches affect time, memory, and live backward work in a ZB-V step on two RTX 5880 GPUs. (a) Step time and global throughput. (b) Peak allocation and direct-gradient capacity. (c) Captured graphs and retained-work capacity scale linearly, whereas the number of live backward records saturates at four; delayed 𝑑𝑊 count continues to grow. Points are medians of three fresh processes per setting. 

stores. All performance benchmarks are conducted on single-node PCIe systems (PP=2 and PP=4 Interleaved), leaving multi-node InfiniBand clusters, tensor/expert parallelism, and PP=4 ZB-V for future investigation. Importantly, the four QEffect relations govern purely intra-stage device semantics; because inter-node pipeline communication relies on standard NCCL point-to-point primitives, stage-level CUDA Graph capture and generational tape tracking remain strictly orthogonal to the underlying network fabric. Additionally, fixed-shape binding reserves one direct-gradient view per configured microbatch, causing graph count and arena footprint to scale linearly with 𝑀 . Checkpoints remain topology-preserving and are captured strictly at quiescent optimizer boundaries. Finally, partial profiler buffer wrap-arounds render reported memory copy volumes lower bounds, although Hopper copy-event counts are exact. VII. Related Work 

Effects in compiler intermediate representations. Sta-bleHLO uses opaque tokens to impose execution order, JAX distinguishes compiler from runtime tokens, and MLIR as-sociates effects with abstract resources [8], [9], [10]. These abstractions order effects. Split pipeline backward also needs to name retained work whose consumer may arrive out of order. The QEffect contract combines order with ownership, version, and device completion for that case. 

Graph capture and compilation. PyTorch 2 captures Python programs and lowers tensor computation through Dynamo, AOTAutograd, and Inductor [5]; torch.fx, Nimble, and TASO provide graph transformation, task scheduling, and substitution search [16], [17], [18]. GraCE broadens CUDA Graph coverage through pointer indirection and selective deployment [7]. Our problem appears at the boundary between the captured tensor program and a scheduler that reorders F/ 𝑑𝐼 /𝑑𝑊 around persistent backend state. 

Low-precision training. Mixed-precision and FP8 training combine higher-precision master state with reduced-precision arithmetic [19], [1], [2], [20], [21]. TE supports persistent FP8 buffers and CUDA Graph execution for documented Megatron schedules [11]. Delayed scaling gives those buffers a temporal order and a cache version, while Static 𝜇 nit Scaling removes dynamic scale state through a different numerical design [12]. Pipeline and distributed runtimes. GPipe and PipeDream develop pipeline schedules and weight versioning [22], [23], [24]; Megatron and DeepSpeed scale distributed transformer training [25], [3], [26]. Zero Bubble separates 𝑑𝐼 and 𝑑𝑊 ,while JaxPP, Piper, and GraphPipe expand schedule and topology support [4], [27], [28], [29], [30]. QEffect binds hidden low-precision state and each retained 𝑑𝑊 object to the resulting action order. 

Distributed graph optimization and persistence. Unity and Alpa jointly optimize computation, placement, and par-allelization [31], [32]; Checkmate models rematerialization lifetimes [33]. Their optimization problems differ from a retained gradient whose later consumer and destination are fixed by capture. PyTorch DCP provides storage [14]; the QEffect restart boundary separates persistent numerical state from rebuilt process-local resources. VIII. Conclusion CUDA Graph replay preserves addresses and tensor op-erations, but it does not by itself preserve the meaning of hidden state or retained backward work. QEffect makes four missing relations explicit: state order, resource ownership, weight version, and device completion. Eager and captured runs match native TE full backward through delayed-scaling rollover. All seven injected violations are rejected at their first boundary, and fresh-process restart reproduces uninterrupted execution. On H800, captured TE runs are 1.82–2.79 × faster than native eager. Direct gradient placement removes 96 copies per rank and improves its matched path by 1.132 ×. Once the four relations are explicit, capture can preserve pipeline concurrency without confusing a reused address with the state or work it represents. Acknowledgment OpenAI Codex [34] assisted with manuscript organization and language editing. The authors developed, evaluated, and verified all technical designs, implementations, and empirical results. References 

[1] P. Micikevicius, D. Stosic, N. Burgess, M. Cornea, P. Dubey, R. Grisenthwaite, S. Ha, A. Heinecke, P. Judd, J. Kamalu, N. Mellempudi, S. F. Oberman, M. Shoeybi, M. Y. Siu, and H. Wu, “FP8 formats for deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05433 , 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05433 [2] H. Peng, K. Wu, Y. Wei, G. Zhao, Y. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Xiong, Z. Yang, B. Ni, J. Hu, R. Li, M. Zhang, C. Li, J. Ning, R. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Chau, H. Hu, and P. Cheng, “FP8-LM: Training FP8 large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18313 , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18313 [3] D. Narayanan, M. Shoeybi, J. Casper, P. LeGresley, M. Patwary, V. A. Korthikanti, D. Vainbrand, P. Kashinkunti, J. Bernauer, B. Catanzaro, A. Phanishayee, and M. Zaharia, “Efficient large-scale language model training on GPU clusters using Megatron-LM,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2021, pp. 1–15. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3458817.3476209 [4] P. Qi, X. Wan, G. Huang, and M. Lin, “Zero bubble (almost) pipeline parallelism,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=tuzTN0eIO5 [5] J. Ansel, E. Yang, H. He, N. Gimelshein, A. Jain, M. Voznesensky, B. Bao, P. Bell, D. Berard, E. Burovski, G. Chauhan, A. Chourdia, W. Constable, A. Desmaison, Z. DeVito, E. Ellison, W. Feng, J. Gong, M. Gschwind, B. Hirsh, S. Huang, K. Kalambarkar, L. Kirsch, M. Lazos, M. Lezcano, Y. Liang, J. Liang, Y. Lu, C. K. Luk, B. Maher, Y. Pan, C. Puhrsch, M. Reso, M. Saroufim, M. Y. Siraichi, H. Suk, S. Zhang, M. Suo, P. Tillet, X. Zhao, E. Wang, K. Zhou, R. Zou, X. Wang, A. Mathews, W. Wen, G. Chanan, P. Wu, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compilation,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , 2024, pp. 929–947. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366 [6] NVIDIA Corporation, “CUDA programming guide: CUDA graphs,” 2026, accessed 2026-08-23. [Online]. Available: https://docs.nvidia.com/ cuda/cuda-programming-guide/04-special-topics/cuda-graphs.html [7] A. Ghosh, A. Nayak, A. Panwar, and A. Basu, “GraCE: Unlocking CUDA graphs with compiler support for ML workloads,” in 20th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation .USENIX Association, 2026, pp. 1927–1947. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi26/presentation/ghosh [8] OpenXLA Project, “StableHLO specification,” 2026, accessed 2026-08-29. [Online]. Available: https://openxla.org/stablehlo/spec [9] JAX Authors, “Sequencing side-effects in JAX,” 2024, jAX Enhancement Proposal 10657; accessed 2026-08-29. [Online]. Available: https: //docs.jax.dev/en/latest/jep/10657-sequencing-effects.html [10] MLIR Project, “Side effects and speculation,” 2026, accessed 2026-08-29. [Online]. Available: https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Rationale/ SideEffectsAndSpeculation/ [11] NVIDIA Corporation, “Transformer engine and Megatron-LM CUDA graph support,” CUDA Graph Best Practice for PyTorch, 2026, accessed 2026-08-23. [Online]. Available: https://docs.nvidia.com/dl-cuda-graph/ latest/torch-cuda-graph/te-megatron-cuda-graphs.html [12] S. Narayan, A. Gupta, M. Paul, and D. Blalock, “𝜇 nit scaling: Simple and scalable FP8 LLM training,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 267. PMLR, 2025, pp. 45 720–45 736. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/narayan25b.html [13] W. Liang, T. Liu, L. Wright, W. Constable, A. Gu, C.-C. Huang, I. Zhang, W. Feng, H. Huang, J. Wang, S. Purandare, G. Nadathur, and S. Idreos, “TorchTitan: One-stop PyTorch native solution for production ready LLM pretraining,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SFN6Wm7YBI [14] PyTorch Contributors, “Distributed checkpoint,” 2026, accessed 2026-08-23. [Online]. Available: https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/main/distributed. checkpoint.html [15] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–67, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html [16] J. K. Reed, Z. DeVito, H. He, A. Ussery, and J. Ansel, “torch.fx: Practical program capture and transformation for deep learning in python,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol. 4, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper/2022/hash/ 7c98f9c7ab2df90911da23f9ce72ed6e-Abstract.html [17] W. Kwon, G.-I. Yu, E. Jeong, and B.-G. Chun, “Nimble: Lightweight and parallel GPU task scheduling for deep learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2020/hash/ 5f0ad4db43d8723d18169b2e4817a160-Abstract.html [18] Z. Jia, O. Padon, J. Thomas, T. Warszawski, M. Zaharia, and A. Aiken, “TASO: Optimizing deep learning computation with automatic generation of graph substitutions,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2019, pp. 47–62. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3341301.3359630 [19] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, D. Garcia, B. Ginsburg, M. Houston, O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh, and H. Wu, “Mixed precision training,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=r1gs9JgRZ [20] S. P. Perez, Y. Zhang, J. Briggs, C. Blake, J. Levy-Kramer, P. Balanca, C. Luschi, S. Barlow, and A. W. Fitzgibbon, “Training and inference of large language models using 8-bit floating point,” in Workshop on Advancing Neural Network Training at NeurIPS , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://neurips.cc/virtual/2023/80694 [21] P. Balanca, S. Hosegood, C. Luschi, and A. Fitzgibbon, “Scalify: Scale propagation for efficient low-precision LLM training,” in Workshop on Advancing Neural Network Training at ICML , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=4IWCHWlb6K [22] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, D. Chen, M. X. Chen, H. Lee, J. Ngiam, Q. V. Le, Y. Wu, and Z. Chen, “GPipe: Efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 32, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2019/ hash/093f65e080a295f8076b1c5722a46aa2-Abstract.html [23] D. Narayanan, A. Harlap, A. Phanishayee, V. Seshadri, N. R. Devanur, G. R. Ganger, P. B. Gibbons, and M. Zaharia, “PipeDream: Generalized pipeline parallelism for DNN training,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2019, pp. 1–15. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3341301.3359646 [24] D. Narayanan, A. Phanishayee, K. Shi, X. Chen, and M. Zaharia, “Memory-efficient pipeline-parallel DNN training,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 7937–7947. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/narayanan21a. html [25] M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, J. Casper, and B. Catanzaro, “Megatron-LM: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 ,2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053 [26] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “DeepSpeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2020, pp. 3505– 3506. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3406703 [27] P. Qi, X. Wan, N. Amar, and M. Lin, “Pipeline parallelism with controllable memory,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ 527dad0b9159805289906d5740a0bdd3-Abstract-Conference.html [28] A. Xhebraj, S. Lee, H. Chen, and V. Grover, “Scaling deep learning training with MPMD pipeline parallelism,” in 

Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol. 7, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2025/ hash/9f73d65a4186198152357be871345771-Abstract-Conference.html [29] M. Frisella, A. Oentoro, X. Gao, G. Bernstein, and S. Wang, “Piper: Towards flexible pipeline parallelism for PyTorch,” in Practical Adoption Challenges of Machine Learning for Systems , 2025, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3766882.3767187 [30] B. Jeon, M. Wu, S. Cao, S. Kim, S. Park, N. Aggarwal, C. Unger, D. Arfeen, P. Liao, X. Miao, M. Alizadeh, G. R. Ganger, T. Chen, and Z. Jia, “GraphPipe: Improving performance and scalability of DNN training with graph pipeline parallelism,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 , 2025, pp. 557–571. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707220 [31] C. Unger, Z. Jia, W. Wu, S. Lin, M. Baines, C. E. Q. Narvaez, V. Ramakrishnaiah, N. Prajapati, P. McCormick, J. Mohd-Yusof, X. Luo, D. Mudigere, J. Park, M. Smelyanskiy, and A. Aiken, “Unity: Accelerating DNN training through joint optimization of algebraic transformations and parallelization,” in 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation .USENIX Association, 2022, pp. 267–284. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/unger [32] L. Zheng, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, Z. Chen, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, D. Zhuo, E. P. Xing, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica, “Alpa: Automating inter- and intra-operator parallelism for distributed deep learning,” in 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation .USENIX Association, 2022, pp. 559–578. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/zheng-lianmin [33] P. Jain, A. Jain, A. Nrusimha, A. Gholami, P. Abbeel, K. Keutzer, I. Stoica, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Checkmate: Breaking the memory wall with optimal tensor rematerialization,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol. 2, 2020, pp. 497–511. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper/2020/hash/ 0b816ae8f06f8dd3543dc3d9ef196cab-Abstract.html [34] OpenAI, “Codex documentation,” 2026, accessed 2026-08-24. [Online]. Available: https://learn.chatgpt.com/codex/overview