Title: From Grid to Chip: Power Architecture, Stability, and Flexibility of AI Data Centers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.11649v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 01:36:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
> 1

# From Grid to Chip: Power Architecture, Stability, and Flexibility of AI Data Centers 

Yubo Song, Senior Member, IEEE , Rui Kong, Member, IEEE , Takuro Umihara, Student Member, IEEE ,Pooya Davari, Senior Member, IEEE , Frede Blaabjerg, Fellow, IEEE , Subham Sahoo, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —The rapid growth of artificial intelligence (AI) com-puting is transforming data centers into large, dynamic electrical loads. Their deployment is primarily constrained by energy avail-ability and grid-connection capacity, which is further aggravated by the ability of power-delivery architectures, control systems, and computing workloads to operate reliably during fast grid disturbances. This article presents a technological perspective on AI data centers as grid-interactive computing systems . First, it reviews grid-integration bottlenecks, evolving connection policies, grid-code requirements, which has fostered new technological trends via spatio-temporal flexibility available through workload orchestration, cooling systems, on-site resources, and energy storage. Second, it maps the evolution of power-delivery ar-chitectures from medium-voltage grid interfaces to chip-level, discussing higher-voltage DC distribution, solid-state transform-ers, wide-bandgap devices, advanced chip-level power delivery, and liquid cooling. Third, it establishes a three-level stability framework spanning rack-level DC-bus dynamics, facility-level converter interactions, and system-level grid-coupled behavior. The framework connects dominant instability mechanisms, in-cluding constant power load effects, impedance interactions, forced oscillations, and operating-mode transitions, with suitable modeling, assessment, and mitigation approaches. Synthesizing these topics, this article highlights grid-to-chip co-design as a central requirement for scalable AI infrastructure, linking computing workloads, power-delivery systems, energy buffers, and grid operation. 

Index Terms —Artificial intelligence (AI), data centers, power electronics, grid interactive computing, power supply architec-tures, system stability, demand flexibility, workload orchestration. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE rapid growth of artificial intelligence (AI) is making data centers a major and increasingly concentrated source of electricity demand. The computational resources used to train AI models have expanded rapidly, while global data center electricity consumption is projected to increase substan-tially during this decade [1], [2]. This expansion is increasingly constrained by limited network capacity, long interconnection lead times, shortages of grid equipment delivery, and local infrastructure constraints [3]–[5]. The resulting challenge is therefore not simply to supply more electrical energy, but also to integrate high-density AI computing infrastructure into power systems reliably, flexibly, and sustainably. AI data centers differ from conventional large electri-cal loads in both power density and dynamic behavior. Accelerators-dominated computing can produce rapid and correlated changes in power demand, whereas the response             

> All authors are with the Department of Energy, Aalborg Univer-sity, Aalborg, Denmark. (e-mails: { yuboso, ruko, taum, pda, fbl, sssa }@energy.aau.dk) ( Corresponding author: Subham Sahoo )

observed by the grid is shaped by cascaded power elec-tronic converters, energy-storage systems, cooling equipment, protection logic, and internal distribution networks [6]–[9]. Consequently, annual energy demand and peak-load estimates alone are insufficient to characterize their system impact. The electrical behavior of an AI data center must be considered across the full path from chip-level voltage regulation to the point of common coupling. This calls for a systemic reliability evaluation that must be assessed at the level of the coupled system rather than from the availability of individual servers, uninterruptible power supplies (UPS), or grid assets alone. The relevant dynamics span controlled power converters, constant power-approximated IT loads, energy buffers, protection and transfer logic, internal distribution networks, and the external grid. Reported events have demonstrated that converter and load interactions can produce facility- or grid-level oscillations, while disturbance-driven load disconnection and restoration can cause substantial frequency and voltage excursions [10], [11]. These observations motivate stability assessment across multiple physical boundaries and time scales. Although prior work has examined AI-related electricity demand, large-load interconnection, flexible computing, data-center power architectures, and converter-dominated stability, these topics are often addressed at separate physical and institutional boundaries. A unified perspective is needed be-cause workload decisions, power-delivery architecture, energy buffering, protection behavior, and grid conditions jointly determine both the electrical behavior and the scalable de-ployment of AI infrastructure. Hence, this article treats AI data centers as grid-interactive computing systems and presents a grid-to-chip framework that connects power-system integra-tion, power-electronics architecture, workload flexibility, and dynamic stability. Specifically, Section II reviews the bottlenecks, connec-tion arrangements, grid-code developments, and flexibility mechanisms relevant to data-center integration. Section III maps the evolution of power-delivery architectures from the grid interface to chip-level regulation. Section IV develops a three-level stability framework covering rack-level, facility-level, and system-level interactions, together with modeling, assessment, and enhancement approaches. Section V outlines future directions for grid-interactive computing infrastructure, evolving grid architectures, convergent power-information sys-tems, and sustainable data-center operation. arXiv:2609.11649v1 [cs.ET] 10 Sep 2026 2

II. I NTEGRATION OF DATA CENTERS INTO POWER GRIDS :PRIMARY CHALLENGES 

With rapid advances in the performance of AI models and the growing number of users, a large number of data center construction has been planned. At the same time, many projects have been suspended due to bottlenecks in power system operation and supply chain integration. This chapter describes the current status of the integration of data centers into power grids and discusses the challenges and opportunities associated with this integration. 

A. Today’s Data Center Integration Status 1) Surging Data Center Demand: With advances in AI models, the need to integrate data centers into power sys-tems is rapidly increasing. Fig. 1 shows the trends in the amount of computing resources used for AI model training, the trends in data center electricity consumption and future projections by the IEA as a base-case scenario, and the trends in average residential electricity rates in the United States. With the emergence of image recognition models based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) around 2012 and the advent of large language models (LLMs) around 2019, the amount of computational resources used for AI training has increased exponentially, with a doubling time of 3.4 months since 2012 [1]. In addition, LLM services are rapidly gaining popularity. For ChatGPT, the average number of daily user messages was 451 million in June 2024, rising to 2627 million by June 2025 [12]. Along with this rapid increase in computational demand and the growing popularity of these services, data center electricity consumption is also expanding, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The annual electricity consumption of operational data centers stood at 416 TWh as of 2024. The breakdown is as follows: 106 TWh for enterprise use, 144 TWh for colocation and service providers, and 166 TWh for hyperscale operations. The IEA projects that under its base-case scenario, total consumption will reach 946 TWh by 2030, and 1193 TWh by 2035 [13]. Connecting large-scale data centers has increased electricity demand and led to supply shortages, which in turn could drive up electricity price rates, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). In fact, average residential electricity rates in the US have continued to rise since 2022. Inflation from 2022 to 2024 was mainly driven by sharp spikes in natural gas prices following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The rise in rates since 2024 was partly attributed to increased data center connection capacity. Analysis in [14] pointed out that operational data centers have already increased electricity wholesale prices by 2% to 6% on average nationwide in the US between 2021 and 2025, with larger effects in regions hosting major data center corridors. 

2) Bottlenecks of Data Center Integration: While many new data center projects have been announced, construction delays have been reported around the world. Table I compares data center capacity (both operational and planned) in major data center corridors [16], the power synchronous systems to which they belong, the lead time from planning to integration [3], and construction costs [3] in each area. Amsterdam and Tokyo have the longest lead times, at 10 years, for new data (a) The Total Amount of Compute by AI Model Training                        

> NETtalk
> TD-Gammon v2.1
> Language models
> Vision models
> Speech models
> 1985
> ALVINN RNN for Speech
> LeNet-5
> 10 –6
> 10 –2
> 10 2
> 10 6
> 10 –10
> BiLSTM for
> Speech
> Deep Belief Nets
> DQN
> AlexNet
> VGG
> ResNets
> T17 Dota 1v1
> Neural Machine Translation
> AlphaGoZero GPT-3
> Megatron-LM
> AlphaZero
> GoogleNet
> Game models
> General and other models DeepSpeech2 Seq2Seq
> Xception
> Petaflop/s-days
> 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 Year
> Neural Architecture Search
> (b) Electricity Consumption Growth of Data Centers
> 2020
> 500
> 750
> 1250
> 250
> Annual Consumption [TWh]
> 2023 2024 2030 2035 Year
> (c) Rise of Average Electricity Price in the U.S.
> 2010 2012
> 0.16
> 0.18
> 0.20
> 0.14
> Price [$/kWh]
> 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 Year
> Enterprise
> Colocation and service provider
> Hyperscale
> Spike of Natural gas price
> Soaring
> Data Center Demand
> Result Prediction by IEA (Base Scenario)
> Needs of powerful computation resources

Fig. 1. Demand increase trend of data centers. (a) Computational resources used by each AI model training [1], (b) Global electricity demand growth of data centers [13], (c) Rise of average electricity price in the U.S. [15]. 

center projects. Moreover, Amsterdam has paused new data center projects due to insufficient grid capacity to integrate large new power loads [4]. The reasons for the long lead time include bottlenecks that exist throughout the process, from data center planning to the start of operations. Fig. 2 illustrates the bottlenecks at each stage. From top to bottom, the figure shows the stages of data center integration: planning, construction, grid connection, and start of operations. The left side of the figure shows bottlenecks in supply chain and integration, while the right side shows bottlenecks in power grid operations. A key point is that while the typical timeline for data center construction is 18 to 36 months, the timeline for power grid operations is 5 to 10 years [17], [18]. In other words, many of the current bottlenecks exist on the operations side. During the planning phase, the data center developer formu-lates the project. This includes securing financing and land, as well as managing the supply chain for power purchase agreements (PPAs) and materials. Delays in these tasks can create bottlenecks. In particular, securing electricity and water is critical for the stable operation of a data center. At the same time, stakeholder communication aimed at 3                                                                            

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF INDUSTRIAL REGIONS ON DATA CENTER DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY , L EAD TIME ,
> AND CONSTRUCTION COSTS FOR DATA CENTER INTEGRATION
> Region Synchronous Operational Cap. Planned Cap. Lead Time Construction Costs Grid Area [MW] [16] [MW] [16] [years] [3] [$ Millions/MW] [3] Amsterdam, Netherlands RG Continental Europe 850 250 10 11-12 Tokyo, Japan Eastern Japan 1200 1705 10 14-18 Frankfurt, Germany RG Continental Europe 800 1228 711-13 London, UK RG Great Britain 1290 1300 712-14 Virginia, US Eastern Interconnection 11300 37500 711-12 Atlanta, US Eastern Interconnection 1800 10000 510-11 Singapore Singaporean Grid 1000 237 412-15 Sydney, Australia National Electricity Market 750 1102 311-12 Dallas, US Texas Interconnection 1800 10000 2.5 10-11 Mumbai, India Indian Grid 750 998 26-7 Dublin, Ireland RG Ireland 1260 695 -10-11 "-": Not specified due to pausing new construction projects.

reaching agreement on the construction plan is also crucial. In particular, there have been cases where projects were abandoned due to insufficient understanding of data center construction, leading to friction with local residents and other stakeholders. In 2026, the Detroit City Council in Michigan, the US, approved a resolution opposing the unrestricted use of water resources by data centers [19], and a nearby utility authority suspended water supply to a specific data center for 12 months [20]. After receiving notification from data center developers regarding grid interconnection plans, power grid system op-erators clarify the plans, facilitate the project maturation, and reach an agreement on the interconnection plan. The timeframes listed in each step are based on guidelines provided by Energinet, Denmark’s transmission system operator (TSO) [21]. The same applies to Fig. 2. The long queue for this procedure creates a bottleneck that extends lead times. In this process, grid interconnection management has traditionally been operated under a "first-come, first-served" principle, whereby the operator who receives approval first gains priority for grid interconnection. Under this rule, operators rushed to submit applications early in order to secure priority [22]. Several system operators, including those in regions such as Frankfurt and Virginia, as shown in Table I, have revised the first-come, first-served rule and established a "first-ready, first-served" priority system that takes into account the feasibility of construction plans [23]. The available interconnection capacity calculated by system operators is generally derived from the difference between the allowable thermal capacity of transmission lines and substa-tions and the allocated capacity. Furthermore, the feasibility of connection is evaluated by comparing the available capacity with the "maximum output during the annual peak demand". These calculations do not take into account demand-side flexibility. Consequently, there are cases where new demand that could be connected to the grid by utilizing flexibility is denied grid connection permission on the grounds of in-sufficient available capacity. An analysis of the U.S. power system [24] concludes that by factoring in flexibility capable of curtailing 0.25% of annual peak demand, 76 GW of new load, equivalent to 10% of the nation’s current aggregate peak demand, could be integrated into the grid. If grid expansion were to be considered for data center integration, it would require additional time to secure land and materials and to conduct analyses of economic and environmental impacts. During the construction phase, shortages of materials and human resources can act as bottlenecks for both data center developers and power grid operators. Building power infras-tructure, such as transformers and power lines, takes longer than constructing a data center. According to the IEA, average lead times for power cables and large transformers have approximately doubled from 2021 to 2024 due to the heavy electrification of society [5]. As a result, there are cases in which a data center is built but cannot be connected to the power grid, leading to longer lead times. During the grid connection phase, both parties will conduct grid connection tests. The data center operator must comply with the grid code established by the system operator. Any unforeseen events that occur during commissioning or grid connection testing may cause delays. 

B. Power Systems Challenges and Opportunities on Data Center Integration. 1) Grid Code Regulations: In preparation for data center consolidation, TSOs and regulatory agencies in each region have been revising grid codes and related regulations. How-ever, the status of these revisions and the specific items being revised vary by TSO globally. Table II compares grid codes and related regulations for large-capacity load connections for TSOs in major data center corridors. For comparison, 9 representative TSOs are selected. PJM, ERCOT, and AESO are TSOs in North America. Energinet is the Danish TSO. TenneT operates Dutch and Northern German transmission systems. EirGrid is the Irish TSO. RTE operates transmission systems in France. NESO is the TSO in the UK. TEPCO is the system operator in the Greater Tokyo region in Japan. The conventional "first-come, first-served" approach to con-nection queue management is not well-suited to handling a large number of concurrent grid connection requests, some 4Planning 

Construction 

Connection 

Operation 

Supply-chain and Integration  Operation  

> Grid Capacity Expansion 12~36 months
> Grid
> Connection Test
> 3~12 months
> Clarification 6~24 months
> Final Operational Permit (3 months~)
> Energization Permit (1~3 months)
> Typical timeline: 18~36 months
> Typical timeline:
> 5~10 years
> Agreement of
> Grid Connection
> Project Maturation 6~18 months
> Temporary Operational Permit (1~3 months)
> Long queue for
> grid-connection
> - Land Acquicition
> - Supply-chain mgmt.
> Considerations for
> Grid Capacity
> Expansion
> Data Center Construction
> Lack of Components
> Labor shortage
> Lack of Components
> Labor shortage
> Project fomulation
> - Land Acquicition
> - Supply-chain mgmt.
> - PPA Agreement
> - Fund raising
> Stakeholder Communication
> - Transformer - HV lines - HV Switchgear
> - Optical components - Semiconductors
> - Gas turbines
> - UPS/Storages
> Labor shortage
> - Analysis
> Worst scenario-based available capacity assessment
> Grid Code
> Compliance
> Commissioning
> Fig. 2. Bottleneck analysis of data center integration. PPA: Power Purchase Agreement

of which are for speculative purposes. First-ready, first-served queue management policy considers the readiness of grid connections for each application, prioritizing those with high feasibility. This policy has been introduced in the UK since 2025 [25], Germany, and Texas, US, in 2026 [26], [27]. The Netherlands, on the other hand, has introduced a social-importance-based grid-connection prioritization rule since Jan-uary 2026. The new framework prioritizes major social objec-tives, including residential construction, hospitals, schools, and national defense [28]. Penalties for delayed projects and screening of multiple ap-plications are considered as compliance measures to mitigate infeasible applications. In Japan, a penalty applies to demand over 30 MW; if a customer continues for a certain period without setting the final contracted capacity as originally planned, the general transmission and distribution operator will review the contracted capacity and impose a penalty [29]. Screening has been widely introduced by TSOs. It aims to identify multi-application congestion in the queue of grid-connection applications. Disclosing available hosting capacity helps data center developers in evaluating potential sites for efficient planning and development. Available capacity information should be kept continuously up to date. DSO Entity and ENTSO-E formed the European Grid Action Plan in 2023 to improve visibility on available grid capacity, helping developers to plan renewable supply and electrified demand projects across the EU [30]. Some TSOs and DSOs have disclosed host capacity for demand connection [31]–[34]. As previously reported, there are concerns that data centers’ grid connections will lead to higher electricity rates for residential customers. As one measure to address this, several TSOs are considering or implementing a cost-allocation system in which a portion of the grid reinforcement fees associated with grid connections is paid to data center operators. Starting in April 2023, the UK applied a Demand High-Cost cap under which, if the reinforcement costs incurred when connecting a customer to the distribution system exceed £1,720/kVA, the customer is required to bear the excess amount [35]. Fast-track under the Connect and Manage policy has been planned by PJM, and the concept was published in Jan. 2026. It offers the Critical Issue Fast Path, which will serve as an alternate path for any entity seeking to mitigate curtailment risk by bringing their own generation to the system, such as data centers that operate their own power plants. PJM also introduced the "Connect and Manage" program to large-scale demand projects that do not involve new power plants, allowing them to connect without waiting for grid upgrades [36]. EirGrid also began requiring data centers of 10 MVA or more to bring on-site or proximate generation since Dec 2025 [37]. Key technical requirements for data centers, including fault ride-through (FRT), power quality, and ramping limitations, should be considered grid codes. While ENTSO-E published recommendations of demand connection codes (DCC) re-quirements for large capacity loads [38], European TSOs have discussed and applied them into their grid codes [39]– [42]. Each requirement varies depending on power system capacity and other conditions. For example, AESO strictly limits ramping to 10 MW/min, while Energinet allows up to 60 MW/min [43]. Based on the grid codes and the extent to which relevant regulations have been implemented, all TSOs are either imple-menting or considering measures in response to the increase in requests for data center connections. As of the time of this paper’s submission, Canada, Denmark, and the Netherlands have paused the acceptance of new connection applications. In grids with a small original capacity, the tendency of data center connections to increase their share of demand also contributes to the suspension of new connections. When comparing the status of discussions by region, simi-larities can be seen in the items being addressed or considered across regions such as North America and Europe. In North America, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) is responsible for establishing uniform regulations and technical standards, while in Europe, this role is fulfilled by ENTSO-E. Because it is relatively easy to generalize and roll out technical standards developed and implemented in regions with early adoption, the items under revision or consideration in the grid codes of North America and Europe are becoming increasingly similar. In fact, ENTSO-E issued a recommendation to each TSO in 2025 regarding revisions to the Demand Code, which includes data centers. Although 5                                                                                                                                           

> TABLE II GRID CODES AND RELATED REGULATIONS FOR LARGE -L OAD CONNECTION [25]–[50]
> System Operator PJM ERCOT AESO Energinet TenneT EirGrid RTE NESO TEPCO
> Country US US CA DK NL IE FR UK JP Currently Pausing New Applications ××◦◦◦×(done) ××(done) ×
> First-ready, First-served ◦◦×△×(※1) ×(※2) ◦◦×
> Penalty for Delayed Project ◦◦◦----◦△
> Screening Multi-application △◦------△
> Transparency on Available Demand Hosting Capacity ×××△(※3) ◦(※4) ◦(※4) △(※4) ◦◦
> Cost Allocation of Grid Enhancement for Connection △◦×◦△×◦◦×
> Prioritizing Queue by Bringing Own On-site Power △◦×××◦×××
> Non-firm Connection or Curtailment Agreement △(※5) ◦(※5) ◦△◦◦◦(※5) ◦△
> Fault Ride Through (FRT) Requirement ×◦◦◦◦△◦××
> Power Quality Requirement ×◦◦◦◦△◦××
> Ramping Limitation (MW/min) ×-◦(10) ◦(60) ---××
> Country Codes: US—United States, CA—Canada, DK—Denmark, NL—Netherlands, IE—Ireland, FR—France, UK—United Kingdom, JP—Japan Status: ◦: Applied; △: Planning/Discussing; ×: Not Applied; -: Not Specified. (※1): Prioritizing social importance of demand facility rather than readiness. (※2): Restricting area and on-site generation instead of introducing first-ready, first-served policy. (※3): Last updated in 2023. (※4): Their DSOs provide available capacity heatmaps at the distribution level. (※5): Data centers in those regions can join optional Demand Response (DR) programs [50].

Japan has an organization called OCCTO responsible for for-mulating grid operation rules for Japan’s TSOs, discussions on revising the grid code are still in the early stages because Japan has integrated fewer data centers into their power systems than North America and Europe. In all of the regions compared, mechanisms to encourage demand response (DR), either through mandatory curtail-ment for data centers with non-firm connections [44]–[49] or through voluntary participation in DR programs [50], have been introduced or are under consideration. The following section explains how data centers can provide the flexibility needed to adjust to demand. 

2) Unlocking Flexibility Capability of Data Centers by Components: Various studies have been conducted on lever-aging the flexibility of data center demand [51]–[57]. Because data centers have large loads, their power shaving provides flexibility in power and energy. Also, data center load can be shifted in time, providing temporal flexibility, if it is not on-demand task such as pre-training for AI models. It can even provide spatial flexibility by allocating its own tasks to geographically distant data centers [51]. Flexibility from data centers can provide power, energy, temporal, and spatial flexibility by control their power demand [52]. These flexibil-ities in data centers are provided by hardware components, such as on-site generation and cooling load, and IT load determined by operation algorithms [53], [54]. IT load has constraints based on the type of computing task and service-level agreement (SLA), which guarantees performance and supports data centers’ response times to their customers [55]. Higher SLA limits the flexibility of data centers in ensuring their service levels [56], [57]. Fig. 3 illustrates examples of the flexibility required of data centers. Fig. 3 (a) shows an example of a GPU power consumption curve taken from the MIT Supercloud Dataset [58]. The power output of this GPU begins to fluctuate around the 15-second mark. Similarly, according to NVIDIA, thousands of GPUs operate in lockstep and perform the same computation on different data during AI training, resulting in grid-level power fluctuations without power smoothing [6]. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), data centers are required to smooth out this fluctuation and prevent adverse effects on the connected power grid [7]. When grid congestion occurs, data centers must reduce their output. Possible methods for achieving this include "load shifting", which defers the use of the data center’s computing resources to a later time, as shown in Fig. 3 (c), or allocating computing resources to another data center. The former is an example of utilizing "Temporal Flexibility", while the latter is an example of utilizing "Spatial Flexibility". For example, the Google data center pilot project demonstrates demand-response capability by distributing IT load across different times and locations based on grid conditions [59]. According to [54], data centers comprise assets that provide flexibility, including DERs such as diesel, PV, and Wind generation; cooling load; IT load; and data center components such as Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) batteries. Data centers include on-site DERs for their primary power sources and for backup use. The most common form of on-site renewable energy generation for data centers is solar power, though there are also cases where other sources, such as micro wind turbines, fuel cells, biogas, and hydroelectric power, are used [60]. Diesel generators are commonly used as backup power sources. Gas turbines and Fuel cells have been used as a cleaner alternative in some cases, and batteries have been considered as another backup source [61]. The cooling load refers to the electrical load consumed by the cooling system in a data center. In water-cooled systems, chilled water generated by chillers and cooling towers is distributed to each rack in the data center via distribution pumps to provide cooling [62]. Cooling systems integrated with thermal energy storage (TES) for data centers can reduce power and energy use and shift capacity over hours [63]. As TES provides response times from minutes to hours, it is not suitable for 6(a)                     

> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.0
> Normalized GPU Power Draw Rate
> 030 60 90 120 Time [s]
> (b)
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.0
> Normalized GPU Power Draw Rate
> 030 60 90 120 Time [s]
> GPU Power Draw
> Smoothed Power
> (c)
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.0
> Normalized GPU Power Draw Rate
> 030 60 90 120 Time [s]
> Allocation
> Shift time 1.0
> 0.0
> 120 180 240
> Time [s]
> Power 1.0
> 0.0
> 060 120
> Time [s]
> Power
> Fig. 3. Needs of flexibility of data center. (a) Typical computing power flow of GPU [58], (b) Needs of power smoothing by the data center components [6], (c) Needs of peak cut by shifting time, or allocating workload to another data center.

frequency regulation services. UPS systems provide critical backup power to operating data centers during grid failures. They provide instantaneous power on demand through their batteries and bridge the gap until other backup sources can provide it. A study proposes utilizing the energy flexibility of UPS batteries, as they have been used for less than 0.1% of their operational lifespan [64]. Research in [65] compared power stabilization methods for AI data center loads, using on-site assets including STAT-COM, BESS under grid-forming control (GFM-BESS), and a combined approach using GFM-BESS and UPS. STATCOM provides voltage stabilization, smooths load variations, and improves power quality at the Point of Common Coupling (PCC). GFM-BESS offers the additional advantage of pro-viding greater energy flexibility. The study mentioned that operating a UPS to mitigate load fluctuations in AI workloads can achieve power smoothing cost-effectively. There have been cases where the IT load profiles and flexibility potential of AI data centers were studied in ad-vance. Traditional data centers process different types of tasks asynchronously and have a baseload consumption profile with minimal load fluctuations. AI data centers are expected to increasingly perform tasks such as model training, inference, and fine-tuning in a centralized manner within a single data center. Consequently, the distinct power consumption profiles of GPUs for each task are more likely to be reflected in the overall data center load profile [6]. The load profile for 10        

> 20
> -10
> Load Profile of Data Center [MW]
> 0:00 6:00 12:00 18:00 24:00
> Time
> IT load Thermal load
> 0
> Other load BESS discharge
> Total load
> -5 MW demand reduction
> by workload allocation
> -8 MW by discharge on-site BESS
> Fig. 4. Example of flexibility utilization by data center; Load reduction by workload allocation between 6:00-8:00 and by discharging on-site BESS between 18:00-21:00.

AI training involves significant power consumption ramping. Furthermore, it has been reported that inference, such as that performed with large language models, exhibits high volatility in load profiles [66]. The study demonstrated a result of temporal flexibility utilization that applying workload orchestration to a production-scale GPU cluster of 130 kW enables the system to handle multiple DR events—including real-time grid dispatch, sustained power curtailment, carbon-aware computations, and geographically distributed load shift-ing—while maintaining service levels for AI priority training and inference jobs [67]. Fig. 4 shows an example of a data center flexibility utiliza-tion case. The data center load profile is based on publicly available 30-minute normalized data by UK Power Networks; specifically, the profile for a single data center connected to the extra-high-voltage grid on April 1, 2026 [68], has been scaled up assuming a capacity of 60 MW. Data center demand includes IT load, thermal load, and other loads such as power supply losses. The share of each load (IT: 56%, thermal: 22%, and other loads, such as power supply losses: 22%) is assumed based on the breakdown of energy consumption for colocation data centers reported in IEA [69]. Fig. 4 assumes that two DR events were triggered on the same day: the first DR, from 6:00 to 8:00, shows a case where the data center’s own demand was reduced through workload allocation, while the second DR, from 18:00 to 21:00, shows a case where the net load at the data center’s connection point was reduced by discharging the on-site BESS. The appropriate source of flexibility will vary depending on the time of day of the DR event, SLA constraints, the importance of the data center’s own resource tasks during the DR period, and the operational status of other data centers. 

3) Unlocking Spatial Flexibility Capability of Data Centers over Regions: Because data centers are widely distributed across cities, countries, and continents, they can provide spatial flexibility. Spatial flexibility use cases can be mainly cate-gorized into two types: local grid congestion mitigation and global synchronous grid balancing. In the Eastern Japan Syn-chronous System, which includes Tokyo, there were instances of supply constraints during peak periods, such as in June 2022 [70]. In such situations, data centers can allocate their load to another synchronous system even if there is no interconnection between the two synchronous grids. The concept of virtually 7                                                                        

> TABLE III GLOBAL SYNCHRONOUS GRID AREA THAT CONTAINS MAJOR DATA CENTER CORRIDORS , P EAK -L OAD CAPACITY ,AND DC C APACITY [13], [73]–[84]
> Synchronous Area Geographical Location Peak-Load Capacity Main Data Center Hub Operational Data Center in 2024 [GW] Capacity in 2024 [GW]
> Eastern Interconnection Eastern area of USA and Canada 621 ( ※1) Virginia, Atlanta 53.7 Western Interconnection Western area of USA and Canada 171 ( ※1) Phoenix, Alberta Texas Interconnection Texas, USA 85 Dallas RG Great Britain UK Great Britain 44.2 London 2.6 RG Ireland Ireland + Northern Ireland 7.1 ( ※1,2) Dublin 11.9 RG Continental Europe Europe excluding Nordics 387 ( ※3) Amsterdam, Frankfurt RG Nordics Nordics 52.7 ( ※3) Stockholm State Grid Corporation of China China mainland excluding south 1465 Shanghai, Beijing, Sichuan 31.9 China Southern Power Grid Southern China mainland Pearl River Delta, Guiyang Hokkaido synchronous area Northern Japan 4.4 Sapporo 6.6 East Japan synchronous area Eastern Japan 70.6 ( ※1) Tokyo West Japan synchronous area Western Japan 90.8 ( ※1) Osaka South Korea synchronous area South Korea 97.1 Seoul India synchronous area India 250 Mumbai 3.6 National Electricity Market Eastern Australia 33.0 Sydney 1.6 South West Interconnected System Western Australia 4.2 Perth North New Zealand North New Zealand 7.0 Auckland South New Zealand South New Zealand Christchurch (※1): Peak load is calculated by summing up peak load in each subregion, which may contain different time. (※2) Sum of peak demand by Ireland of 5.6 GW [82] and Northern Ireland of 1.5 GW [83]. (※3): RG Nordics contains Norway, Sweden, Finland, and the DK2 region of Denmark, assuming 40% of Danish peak demand is accounted for based on [84]. RG Continental Europe contains the rest of the areas excluding Great Britain, Ireland, and Georgia, and including DK1, as 60% of Danish peak demand [84].

interchanging power and energy between data centers, not through power lines but through fiber communication net-works, has been called "Virtual interconnector [71]" or "Virtual power lines [72]." Attempts at resource allocation between data centers on different continents (synchronous areas), as described in [59], are expected to help reduce grid congestion and prevent blackouts. Research in [52] shows the potential to reduce data center operational costs by leveraging spatial flexibility across three interconnection areas in the US. Based on these concepts, this paper discusses the potential for further utilization of spatial flexibility, extending from synchronous power systems to intercontinental scales. Table III shows the synchronous systems to which major data center deployment regions belong, along with the peak load capacity in 2024 [73]–[84] and data center capacity deployed in each region as of 2024 [13]. The United States has the largest data center capacity, at 53.7 GW, across the Eastern Interconnection, Texas Interconnection, and Western Intercon-nection. In Europe, the United Kingdom alone has 2.6 GW of data centers. The UK is an independent synchronous system connected via HVDC to the Irish, Continental, and Nordic synchronous systems. Europe has 11.9 GW of operational data centers, most of which are located within the Continental European grid. While the Irish grid has a capacity of approx-imately 8 GW and peak demand reached 7.1 GW in 2024, it hosts 1.26 GW of operational data centers, meaning data center demand accounts for a large share of its total capacity. In Asia, 31.9 GW of data center capacity has been deployed in China, with the majority located within the synchronous grid managed by the State Grid Corporation of China. Southern China features a separate synchronous grid managed by China Southern Power Grid, which includes data center hubs such as the Pearl River Delta and Guiyang. South Korea and Japan to-gether host 6.6 GW of data centers. South Korea operates as a single, independent synchronous grid. Japan primarily consists of three synchronous systems, Hokkaido, Eastern Japan, and Western Japan, which are connected via HVDC. India has a single, independent synchronous system that includes 3.6 GW of data centers. Australia and New Zealand have 1.6 GW of data centers in operation, the majority of which belong to the National Electricity Market (NEM) synchronous system. By allocating resources across these synchronous systems, it is possible to alleviate supply-demand imbalances that are difficult to address within a single synchronous system alone, thereby overcoming the constraints of HVDC interconnection. Since some tasks cannot handle data from other regions due to data latency and privacy constraints, it is also necessary to quantify which tasks can be flexibly allocated across regions. 

4) Incentivization of Flexibility Utilization from Data Cen-ter: From the data center operator’s perspective, the value of flexibility must exceed the value of Compute Load [$/MWh] (VoCL), which translates cloud market economics into an implied willingness to pay for electricity. It has been reported that VoCL varies with the type of computing task and the class of AI [85]. On-demand tasks running within the scope of an SLA have the highest VoCL, making them difficult to utilize for flexibility. Interruptible tasks, such as model pre-training and computations involving checkpoints, have a VoCL less than one-tenth that of on-demand tasks subject to SLAs, indicating they are easier to use for flexibility. PJM and European TSOs are considering a transition to connect & manage for large-scale demands such as data centers [36]. Since the value of available flexibility varies by AI class and task, it is important to identify the flexibility that data centers 8

can naturally contribute and to establish a clear division of roles, such as requiring data centers to provide electricity price-hedging functions based on VoCL price tiers or offering priority service contracts. 

C. Observations and Recommendations 

Through the widespread occurrence of extended lead times in response to the growing need for integration into today’s data center power systems, we identified the bottlenecks in the supply chain, integration processes, and power system operations that contribute to these longer lead times. It was observed that the processes on the power system operations side tend to span a longer period than data center construction. The analysis also covered the implementation status and plans for grid codes and related regulatory reforms being carried out by TSOs in major data center hub regions to resolve these operational bottlenecks. While efforts to establish unified standards are underway in both North America and Europe, there are certain differences in the areas being revised: in Europe, efforts to increase transparency regarding available hosting capacity are progressing, whereas in North America, discussions are advancing on a policy allowing data centers to bring their own on-site power. Mechanisms are being prepared or considered to require data centers to adjust their demand through various means, such as requesting curtailment via non-firm connections or offering voluntary DR programs. Data centers must smooth instantaneous load fluctuations, provide temporal flexibility to shift load over time, and offer spatial flexibility to reduce demand by allocating workloads to other data centers. The trend in providing flexibility has been introduced using DERs on-site, thermal energy systems for cooling, and IT workloads. Because the allocation capability of IT workloads varies with task priority and SLA constraints, the resources available for flexibility vary by time of day. Additionally, it was discussed how the spatial flexibility of data centers can mitigate not only local grid congestion but also supply-demand imbalances in global synchronous systems. Peak demand levels in synchronous systems and data center capacity in areas with major data center hubs were presented to identify potential sites for virtual intercon-nectors (virtual power lines) across regions, beyond power transmission via HVDC or international interconnectors. VoCL was introduced as a potential metric to motivate data center DR. Further refining this concept will clarify the flexibility available for virtual interconnectors across regions. III. P OWERING THE GRID -TO -C HIP VOLTAGE CASCADES :POWER ELECTRONICS ENABLERS 

A. From Grid Boundary to Chips: A Cross-Scale Hierarchy 

The power path in an AI data center is typically a con-tinuously voltage-decreasing, current-increasing cascading hi-erarchy, as illustrated by the grid-to-chip hierarchy in Fig. 5 [8], [9]: voltage is stepped down from medium/low-voltage (MV/LV) AC grids towards on-tray extra-low voltage (ELV) level, where online uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) pro-vide backup support for rack-level buses (conventionally 48 V Utility Grid LFT: Line-Frequency Transformer      

> UPS: Uninterruptible Power Supply BBU: Backup Battery Unit
> PDU/PSU: Power Distribution/Supply Unit LFT PDU Rack PDU Rack PDU PSU PSU IT Tray IT Tray
> In-Rack BBU
> Rack Bus Server Array Bus Data Center Bus BBU UPS
> MV / LV LV LV / ELV
> MV: Medium Voltage, over 1000 V AC or 1500 V DC
> LV: Low Voltage, up to 1000 V AC or 1500 V DC ELV: Extra-Low Voltage, up to 50 V AC or 120 V DC
> Fig. 5. General grid-to-chip hierarchy of data center power supply supported by power electronics interfaces [8], [9].

DC for information-technology (IT) trays) [86]. The voltage-class labels in Fig. 5 are worth foregrounding given that they mark where this hierarchical shift crosses a regulatory boundary more than merely physical one. Power electronics underpins all stages of this hierarchy, performing both AC-DC conversion, voltage stepping and desired power distribution with power semiconductors at high controllability and power efficiency. Technically, each tier in Fig. 5 does not share identical design objectives despite belonging to the same power delivery chain. The baseline was designed for a load profile that has however changed signifi-cantly throughout the decade, while as individual rack power already scales towards megawatt level or even higher [87], the acuteness of high-power and high-volatility AI data center loads is no longer negligible [7]: a 1 MW rack corresponds to approximately 20 kA of current on a conventional 48 V ELV bus, that yields in-rack bus design extremely challenging. This fundamental constraint in current escalation—rather than efficiency alone—is driving the ongoing paradigm shift in data center power electronics. Beyond backup duty, they are also increasingly called upon to participate in grid-interfacing power regulation or management. Those transitions are inspir-ing new power electronics designs at the rack and tray level, yet dedicated standardization for LV IT trays remains an open problem [88]. The major design priorities can be summarized as Table IV, while they are supposed to serve for the following aspects targeting distinct physical evolutions [8], [89], [90]: 1) From the 48 V in-rack ELV DC bus to 800 V LV DC bus . As current scales inversely with voltage at fixed power, ELV naturally pushes the conduction loss as well as conductor cross-section size to their engineering limits [89]. An example is reported by NVIDIA where adopting 800 V DC in place of 415 V AC reduces the copper requirements by 45% [91], [92], directly relieving the 20 kA bottleneck as identified, whereas future possibility is also seen towards 1500 V DC ( ±750 V) to fully utilize the standardized LV DC framework [9]. This redefines where the DC-DC conversion primarily occurs, formulates 800 V in-rack DC distribution, and shifts the voltage step-down towards the IT trays [90], 9

[92], [93]. However, it also brings along a 16.7× jump of the conversion ratio compared with conventional 48 V cases that challenges conventional small-scale DC-DC conversion design. To this end, new topology families while preserving power density and efficiency are there-fore motivated as an important technical focus. 2) From LV AC to LV DC facility buses . Since IT loads are inherently DC at the point of consumption, conversion into intermediate AC buses shows limited advantages other than conforming to the legacy AC infrastructure. DC power distribution improves the power efficiency in distribution bus bars and reduces the conductor volume [89], meanwhile eliminating the redundant stages in the power chain improves operational reliability and further enables energy storage to directly interact with server rack behaviors and perform faster response to server-rack load transients. Nevertheless, with less fault-interruption ability, DC distribution grounding and protection must in turn be designed more rigorously than in conventional AC infrastructures. 3) From line-frequency transformer (LFT) to solid-state transformers (SSTs) . This shift is grounded in the trans-former scaling physics, where, by replacing the bulky 50/60 Hz LFT cores with power electronics converter cells coupled through intermediate medium- to high-frequency transformers (MFTs/HFTs), the volume is sig-nificantly decreased and higher power density can be achieved [89]. SSTs impart modularity and scalability that allow the power interfaces to be more readily recon-figured and keep pace with the requirements from rapidly evolving server racks, of which the standardization is also being defined that aims to highlight their responsibilities on both grid and data center sides [94]. 

B. Architectures of Power Electronics Converters 

Various architectures of power electronics converters enable the aforementioned power conversion, voltage stepping and power distribution at each bus hierarchy, with representative AC-DC and DC-DC topologies summarized in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively [8], [89], [95]. The primary AC-DC building blocks are typically the two-level bridge shown in Fig. 6(a) or the Vienna rectifier structure in Fig. 6(b), with the possibility of extension in voltage levels and plus the initiative of using MFTs/HFTs for both galvanic isolation and higher power density. At the grid-interfacing data center bus, this shares common operational philosophy with the general SSTs for energy routing [95]–[97] but often without the stage of converting LV DC back to AC. DC-DC converters used for PDUs or UPS/backup-battery units (BBUs) are most com-monly configured based on the dual-active bridge (DAB) or resonant converters (Fig. 7(a)(b)) where bi-directional power flow is especially preferred, while uni-directional topologies like forward, flyback and push-pull configurations are also reported in [98] that are more suitable for on-board power conversion within IT trays. A common design principle for both families is the dis-tribution of voltage and current stress across converter cells:                  

> TABLE IV DESIGN PRIORITIES FOR POWER ELECTRONICS IN DATA CENTERS :KEY FEATURES AND JUSTIFICATIONS
> Priority Technical Justification
> Voltage/current staging Cascaded power conversion from MV/kV-level utility feeds to sub-1 V chip rails, where step-down ratio grows sharply shaping the choice of converter topologies. Modularity Scalable modification of rails, racks or converter cells with least interruption on the power delivery of IT trays; however benefits are bounded by the modularization penalty in terms of per-cell isola-tion requirements. Capability of power fluctuation, harmonics and power quality Large and synchronized AI server power swings inject harmonic content that risks exciting resonant modes in upstream grids, also motivating active power-factor correction (PFCs) or filtering at the grid interface. Fast dynamic response Sub-millisecond compute or communication phase transitions in AI computing tasks demand high con-verter control bandwidth and low output impedance to preserve voltage tracking at the point of load. Power efficiency and density Minimizing power loss and volume simultaneously at the Gigawatt-scale facility power benefits cost optimization as well as offsetting the overhead of cooling design. Reliability or fault-tolerant architecture Continuous operation under mission-critical ser-vices underlines fault avoidance, robustness against unexpected faults, or the ability to limit the impacts of any single failure on coupled server units. Isolation and protection Galvanic isolation shifts from optional (ELV) to mandatory (LV/MV); DC distribution inside data centers further raises concerns about protection designs. EMI/EMC performance High di /dt or dv /dt from fast high-frequency switching must avoid coupling into co-located and EMI-sensitive xPU and memories. Thermal/cooling design Loss not delivered as useful IT load power is dissipated as heat that affects both efficiency and reliability. Higher power density of power elec-tronics and compact converter packaging require synthesized thermal validation and optimization.

connection in series for voltage division at MV buses and in parallel for current sharing at LV buses—typically forming the input-series-output-parallel (ISOP) configuration described by [8]. The MV boundary is thereby reached by cascading lower-voltage sub-modules, as in modular multilevel converters (MMCs) (Fig. 6(c)) or cascaded H-bridge (CHB) converters (Fig. 6(d)), while load-side power distribution can be facili-tated through common DC bus or multi-winding transformers. An example of the 800 V-to-1 V conversion is reported by [99], and [89] underlines hybridization (combination of LFTs and/or power electronics converters), modularization (modu-larization of SST topologies), and decentralization (power dis-tribution at different hierarchies) for future data center power distribution architectures. Among them, converter modularity benefits the manufacturing and improves field-scalability and replaceability, but it comes alongside the fundamental trade-off concerning voltage/current capability, insulation requirements, maintenance costs and other embodied costs such as space occupation. A key point lies in the "modularization penalty" [89]: each isolation barrier may still be subject to the full operating voltage rating, which bounds the converter cell counts, per-cell power rating and the reasonable power rating 10 SM                     

> Modular Multilevel Converter (MMC)
> SM SM
> SM SM SM
> SM SM SM
> MV DC MV AC
> SM SM SM SM SM SM SM SM SM
> LV DC (cells)
> Cascaded H-Bridge (CHB) Converter MV AC
> LV DC
> 3-ph LV AC (a) SMs: Sub-Modules (half-/full-bridge) (c) (d)
> SM SM SM SM SM SM
> MV AC
> SM SM SM
> SM SM SM
> Phase-Modular Solid-State Transformer (SST) (e) 3-phase MFT MFT: Medium-Frequency Transformer LV DC LV DC 3-ph LV AC (b)

Fig. 6. Representative AC-DC power electronics converter topologies for data center applications [89], [95], including: (a) two-level converter; (b) Vienna rectifier; (c) modular multilevel converter (MMC); (d) cascaded H-bridge (CHB) converter; and (e) phase-modular solid-state transformer (SST) architecture. 

of SSTs. When integrating the BBUs, the shift towards 800 V LV DC bus moves the chip-level loads progressively closer to the interconnection point, as exemplified in Fig. 8. The design is basically subject to power efficiency and operational dura-bility, both of which generally benefit from minimizing the number of conversion stages between grid and load [100]— which becomes particularly outstanding given the tremendous power consumption of modern server loads [7]. For modular topologies, the two considerations are further addressed by mitigating the unbalance across sub-modules and circulating currents between the phase legs. UPS converters have also been developed from merely maintaining the output voltage towards grid-interactive assets. Commercially, bi-directional UPS systems for data centers are deployed to buffer the mutual impacts between the utility grid and AI servers, like grid-supporting [94] and guaranteeing the power quality against AI workload fluctuations [101]. Nevertheless, this should not be pursued simply by oversizing the storage capacity, but alternatively achieved by exploiting the flexibility from xPU loads—the alternation between near-MFT MV DC LV DC Multi-Winding Transformer Solid-State Transformer (SST) (a) (b) LV DC LV DC LV DC LV DC MFT MFT   

> MFT: Medium-Frequency Transformer LV DC (cells) (c) (e) (f) LV DC (cells) (d) LV / MV DC LV DC (cells) I1= I 2
> V1= V 2
> Cres
> LV / MV DC  LV / MV DC

Fig. 7. Representative DC-DC power electronics converter topologies for data center applications [8], [95], including: (a) dual active bridge (DAB) converter; (b) LLC resonant converter; (c)-(e) voltage stepping configurations based on (c) primary-side voltage sharing, (d) primary-side current sharing, and (e) power distribution through a multi-winding transformer; and (f) solid-state transformer (SST). BBU BBU BBU UPS UPS UPS (a) (b) (c) Grid Grid Server (Array) Bus (AC) 

> Grid Server (Array) Bus (AC) Server (Array) Bus (DC)
> +
> –

Fig. 8. Interfacing of server-level backup battery units (BBUs) through power electronics uninterruptible power supply (UPS) systems, with (a) and (b) for AC server buses and (c) for DC ones. 

TDP (thermal design power) and near-idle phases—to assist the power distribution. Upon these, we further map the data center power supply architectures in [8] throughout the hierarchies and summarize the observations into Table V. Rather than mapping a single architecture, we aim to extend the same observations also to the emerging 800 V-DC-class solutions like [92], as a com-prehensive reference whenever the relevant hierarchy levels or converter stages are involved. 

C. Evolution of Power Electronics Devices 

The capability of the converter topologies are also deter-mined by the power semiconductor devices. Forefront ad-vancements mainly come down to three interlocking aspects: device type, emerging materials and device packaging. 1) Device type . In general, insulated gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs), metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transis-tors (MOSFETs) and the newer high-electron-mobility transistor (HEMTs) are the three families that currently 11 

TABLE V AI D ATA CENTER POWER SUPPLY ARCHITECTURE —A G RID -TO -C HIP HARDWARE MAP FROM [8] 

Hierarchy Hardware Proposition Technical Profiles Key Observations 

Utility Level LFT Grid Interface 

Topology : Passive transformer 

Objective : Grid interfacing, galvanic isolation 

Voltage level : MV AC to LV AC (480 V level, 3-phase) Substation-level insulation and grounding MV-SST Grid Interface 

Topology : AC-DC bi-directional, modularization for ISOP 

Objective : Grid interfacing, galvanic isolation and grid-level interactivity 

Voltage level : MV AC to LV DC (800 V level) Grid synchronization + PFC Fast data-center-level protection and fault isolation MV-rated device and insulation design Facility Front End (Facility PDU) 

Topology : AC-DC-AC or AC-DC bi-directional 

Objective : AC-synchronization + rack-level power distribution 

Voltage level : LV AC to LV DC (800 V level) AC bus synchronization + PFC Data-center-level protection Facility UPS Interface 

Topology : AC-DC or DC-DC bi-directional 

Objective : Data-center-level energy storage + power stabilization, grid interactivity (power conditioning) 

Voltage level : LV AC or DC to LV/ELV DC batteries Battery management Hot-swap capability (For DC buses) DC fault detection capability Rack Level Rack-level "sidecar" PDU 

Topology : AC-DC, modularization for parallel racks/PSUs 

Objective : AC-synchronization + rack-level power distribution 

Voltage level : LV AC to LV/ELV DC (800 V/48 V level) AC bus synchronization + PFC Data-center-level protection Rack PDU and PSU 

Topology : DC-DC, modularization for multiple IT trays 

Objective : Voltage step-down for legacy IT-tray compatibility 

Voltage level : LV DC to ELV DC (48 V level) High-current capability (kA level) Rack-level interactivity (For 800 V DC) High step-down ratio In-Rack BBU Interface 

Topology : DC-DC bi-directional, modularization for multiple BBU cells 

Objective : Rack-level energy storage + power stabilization 

Voltage level : LV/ELV DC to LV/ELV DC batteries Sub-ms transient response Battery management Hot-swap capability Chip Level On-tray PSU and IBC 

Topology : DC-DC, typically uni-directional 

Objective : Intermediate bus conversion 

Voltage level : LV/ELV DC to ELV VIB (12 V level, 1.8-24 V) High current density High-dv /dt , di /dt capability and EMI performance (For 800 V DC) High step-down ratio On-chip VR 

Topology : DC-DC, typically uni-directional 

Objective : PoL voltage regulation 

Voltage level : ELV VIB to chip level (1 V level, <5 V) Sub-μs transient response Very high current density High-di /dt capability and EMI performance 

Note : PFC—Power-Factor Correction; VR—Voltage Regulator; IBC—(on-tray) Intermediate Bus Converter; VIB —(on-tray) Intermediate-Bus (IB) voltage, typically 12 V level. Other acronyms are defined as per Fig. 5. 

best suited to data center applications. IGBTs typically serve for higher-voltage and moderate-frequency stages (at the legacy AC-DC front ends or UPS rectifiers), with around tens of kHz switching frequency. MOSFETs or HEMTs, on the other hand, dominate where faster switching and lower conduction loss matter more, like power-factor correction (PFC) and point-of-load voltage regulation modules (PoL VRMs) [102], which is in-creasingly essential especially given the scale and rapid fluctuation of AI workloads. Controllable thyristors and other multi-kV devices, however, are largely absent from the rack itself, since modularized topologies already cover the voltage level needed. 2) Emerging materials . Silicon (Si) devices are economi-cal default when voltage and frequent requirements are modest, while wide-bandgap (WBG) materials like SiC and GaN are proved to be better high-voltage high-dv /dt 

solutions [103]–[105]. Reported data-center benchmarks illustrate the scale of the gain from Si to WBG devices in both efficiency and power density [104], and [105] compares several WBG-based application examples. A further tier, ultrawide-bandgap (UWBG) materials like di-amond, Ga 2O3 or AlN [104]–[106], promises still higher device performances but remain to be fully demonstrated in practice. 3) Device packaging . Packaging of power electronics de-vices sets the parasitic parameters (especially inductance) that limits the device switching speed and thus power efficiency. This is considerably more significant for WBG and UWBG devices with high di /dt and dv /dt , and the resulting design trend is to preserve the fast-switching performance through low-inductance interconnects [102], including co-packaging of gate drivers or integrated cool-ing. Infineon’s .XT diffusion-soldering interconnect has been reported [107], which reduces the junction-to-case thermal resistance Rth , JC by up to 25% than the prior generation, indicating an improvement in the thermal performance and thus allowing for higher power density as needed for data centers. 

D. Chip-Level Power Supply Innovations and Trends 

Besides the shift towards 800 V LV DC bus, the chip-level power delivery network (PDN) becomes a distinct focus to further enhance the power efficiency and density as AI workloads scale up. The converter substrates are integrated closer the xPU motherboard, aiming to address the "last inch" of power conversion from the converter (voltage regulator) input to the die and reduce the losses along the track paths 12 

(the IR drop). Chip manufacturers have been developing and commercializing the backside power delivery (BPD) at die level, where certain power-delivering interconnects are moved to the backside of the wafer beneath the transistors—as reported by Intel (PowerVia [108], [109]), TSMC (A16 [110]) and Samsung (SF2Z, [111]). Though mature wafer fabrication process is demanded, it improves the logic density by freeing the front-side high-speed I/O routing next to the xPUs, and reduces the IR drop through widened power wiring. Nevertheless, BPD only reaches the die’s own internal metal stack, but external converters are still needed to feed the die, especially as the upstream bus voltage rises to 800 V where the insulation clearance required by the external converter becomes non-negligible. On the other hand, fully on-chip power supplies do not straightforwardly outperform that of off-chip ones at the same hierarchical scale [112], where the efficiency gained from proximity is offset by the on-die em-bedded passive components. The converters are conventionally placed beside the die, known as lateral power delivery (LPD), from which the vertical power delivery (VPD) architectures are investigated [91], [113]–[116], that relocate the converters vertically underneath the die and shorten the power delivery track paths—directly in contrast to the off-chip LPD solutions as illustrated in Fig. 9. Relevant solutions have been reported by Google (patent, [117]) and Infineon (OptiMOS power modules [118]). In essence, VPD goes beyond the electrical-dominated design and optimizes the board area around the processors by pushing the design also towards the mechanical boundaries—sparing space also for high-speed I/O around the xPUs, significantly benefiting the design for next-generation high-performance AI processors. The said challenge in embedded passive components still exist for VPD, thus motivating the dedicated studies on planar transformers [119] as well as cooling design [120] for VPD. Also, since BPD and VPD address different and non-overlapping segments of the chip-level power delivery paths, they are not competing solutions but can be combined for the near-future implementations. 

E. Development of Cooling Design 

Temperature constrains both the computational perfor-mances of xPUs and the efficiency and reliability of power electronics components, where air cooling is being displaced by chip-level liquid cooling to sustain the rack power density beyond what air can dissipate [121]. This limit is being further pushed by advances at the coolants/heat sink materials [122]– [125] and thermal channel design [126]–[130], as well as an in-chip microfluidic approach as reported by Microsoft [131]. It is also worth noting that cooling is becoming an interdisci-plinary concern more than merely thermal management, given that cooling is itself a substantial and increasingly flexible load on the grid—which can consume as much as 10-20% of the system power consumption in total [66]. Liquid cooling is effectively enabling the aggregation of the "waste" heat generated by data centers [132], while apart from the reuse of it [133], [134], active cooling combined with scheduling of computing workloads is drawing a non-trivial yet compar-atively controllable share of the facility power, positioning IBC IBC    

> Cooling
> Alternative VR placements IBC: Intermediate Bus Converter
> VR: Voltage Regulator
> SoC: System-on-Chip Rack Bus Input 48 V to 800 V SoC Card Intermediate VR SoC (~0.6-1 V) Substrate Cooling Rack Bus Input 48 V to 800 V SoC Card SoC (~0.6-1 V)
> Substrate
> Single-Stage VR (a)
> (b)
> Power delivery path along
> voltage conversion chain
> Fig. 9. Representative chip-level power delivery architectures [113]–[115], (a) lateral power delivery (LPD) where converters are placed beside the die, and (b) vertical power delivery (VPD) where converters are placed vertically underneath the die. Backside power delivery (BPD), in contrast, focuses on the semiconductor wafer within the system-on-chip (SoC) and thus does not overlap with LPD or VPD.

it as a candidate flexibility resource for grid-interfacing DR and complementing the workload-storage energy balancing strategies [135]. To this end, cooling design in AI data centers is a co-design variable alongside voltage class and converter placement, rather than simply a downstream consequence of them. IV. S TABILITY OF DATA CENTER SYSTEMS 

The power-delivery paths of modern data centers com-prise multiple cascaded power electronic stages, including grid-interfacing rectifiers or uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs), facility-level AC/DC distribution interfaces, server power supply units (PSUs), and downstream point-of-load DC-DC converters [136]. These stages are regulated by closed-loop controllers and interact through electrical networks. Instability may originate within the data center even when it is connected to a strong utility grid, while rapid workload variations and internal oscillations can propagate through interface converters and affect the external power system [137]. Data center stability is therefore a multiscale interaction problem involving the computing load, cascaded converters, internal distribution system, and utility grid, rather than the isolated stability of any individual device. As summarized in Table VI, reported real-world instability events include the 14.7 Hz oscillation at the Dominion data center [138], an event of approximately 23 Hz observed in the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) system [139], and an oscillation around 11 Hz at the Meta data center [140]. A data center in the Midwestern United States also experienced periodic 1 Hz disturbances, repeatedly triggering an inherent pattern of approximately 11 Hz [141]. Such events can propagate beyond the facility, increase equipment stress, and cause unintended protection operation. Distur-bance response also presents grid-related stability concerns. A 1500 MW data-center load reduction in the U.S. Eastern Interconnection increased the system frequency and voltage [142], while a 387 MW reduction in Ireland raised frequency 13 

to 50.341 Hz with a Rate-of-Change-of-Frequency (RoCoF) of approximately +0.26 Hz/s [11]. These events highlight the need for data-center stability models, systematic studies of control interactions, and fault ride-through coordination. To this end, this section first establishes a stability-oriented three-level framework, and then reviews the dominant stability mechanisms, modeling and assessment methods, and enhance-ment strategies. 

A. Stability Scope and Classification 1) Scope of Instability Issues: In this article, data center stability is defined as the ability of the interconnected data center electrical system and its supporting grid to maintain bounded electrical variables and recover to an admissible equilibrium or operating trajectory following a disturbance. It covers both internal stability, referring to the dynamic integrity of the power-delivery system inside the facility, and grid-coupled stability, referring to the mutual influence between the data center and the external grid. The stability-related issues considered here can be grouped into four broad categories, as shown in Fig. 10. First, small-signal instability includes poorly damped or self-excited oscil-lations around a specific steady-state operating point, caused by interactions among power electronic devices or interactions between devices and the external grid. Such interactions have produced both low-frequency and kilohertz-range resonances in operating data centers [140]. Second, large-signal or tran-sient instability concerns the response to disturbance events such as abrupt workload changes, grid or DC bus faults, and UPS mode transitions. These events can cause failure to restore the pre-disturbance operating state, resulting in DC-bus voltage collapse, sustained oscillations, or even widespread load loss [143]. Third, we include forced oscillations, where synchronized computing activity or other periodic disturbances may excite inherent converters or grid modes, even though they might be stable in the small-signal sense [144]. Such oscillations can be selectively amplified by the internal power-delivery chain when the excitation frequency approaches the weakly damped mode. The field-observed 14.7-Hz event as-sociated with a data center UPS illustrates that external exci-tation, a weakly damped internal mode, controller instability, and nonlinear limiting can coexist in the same physical event [138]. In addition, grid-side stability impacts may arise from aggre-gate transitions in data center power consumption. Severe grid disturbances can trigger protection actions, mode transfers, or large-scale load disconnection of data centers, causing abrupt changes in demand that induce frequency excursions, voltage variations, and power-flow redistribution [142]. In contrast, poorly coordinated reconnection or load restoration can create secondary demand steps, leading to repeated tripping [54]. Thus, the grid-interactive impacts, like disconnection, recon-nection, and protection-induced load changes, are treated as a distinct fourth class of data center stability issues. 

2) Stability-Oriented Three-Level Framework: Data center stability encompass dynamics from chip-level voltage regula-tion to bulk-grid electromechanical responses [145], [146]. A single model that retains all components and time scales is neither computationally practical nor necessary. We therefore organize the main electrical structure of data centers into three analytical tiers, i.e. rack, facility, and system levels, according to the system boundary and the interactions that must be explicitly retained, as shown in Fig. 11. At the rack level, the upstream rack supply is normally treated as a stiff or ideal source, whereas the rack DC bus,                             

> TABLE VI SOME REPORTED DATA -C ENTER -R ELATED OSCILLATION AND LOAD -R EDUCTION EVENTS
> Events Date Key Dynamics / Grid Implications Cause / Interpretation
> Data center oscillation in Dominion Energy’s power system [138] Jun. 2022 Instability of a 10–11 Hz UPS control mode, evolving into a 14.7 Hz sustained oscillation UPS–grid control interaction and periodic voltage-sag triggers. ERCOT’s large electrical load oscillation in Texas, U.S [139] Oct. 2024 23 Hz oscillation with a peak-to-peak power of up to 50 MW A poorly damped load-dependent mode associated with the PSU PFC/DC-link voltage control and legacy firmware. Oscillation in Meta’s data centers [140] 2017 11 Hz oscillation in data center facility, with 49/71 Hz spectral components Impedance resonance between aggregated server PSUs and the facility distribution network, driven by negative damping from the DC-link voltage-control dynamics. Forced Ringdown in the Midwest, U.S. [141] 2023 1 Hz active-power perturbations repeatedly excited a 11 Hz grid mode Unintended one-second cycling of data-center power electronics acted as external forcing for the 11 Hz natural grid mode. Data center load reduction in Eastern Interconnection, U.S. [142] Jul, 2024 Six voltage dips occurred in 82 s, reaching 0.25–0.40 p.u.; approximately 1,500 MW of load was reduced, increasing grid frequency and voltage. A permanent 230 kV fault and repeated auto-reclosing triggered transfer of data-center loads to backup power. Data center load reduction in Dublin, Ireland [11] May, 2025 Data center demand fell by 387 MW, and frequency rose from approximately 50.02 to 50.341 Hz, with RoCoF reaching about +0.26 Hz/s. A North Wall–Poolbeg 220 kV cable fault triggered data center protection and supply-transfer responses.
> Note : UPS—Uninterruptible Power Supply; PSU—Power Supply Units; PFC—Power-Factor Correction; 14 Grid Converters IT Loads
> Interaction Interaction Small perturbation around operating point
> Small-Signal Instability
> Time Variable Eigenvalue λ
> Re{ λ} < 0 :
> Damped Stabilization Re{ λ} ≥ 0 :Poorly damped or self-excited
> oscillation
> Current limiting / Mode transition / Bus voltage collapse
> Time Variable
> Large-Signal Instability
> Large Workload
> Step
> Grid
> Faults
> Time Variable
> Converters
> DC Bus
> Time Variable Within the attraction region after disturbance:
> Equilibrium recovery
> Outside the attraction region after disturbance: Loss of equilibrium
> Data Center
> Stability
> Forced Oscillation
> Periodic
> excitation
> Inherent resonance mode Excited Response
> Synchronized and periodic workload Amplification via power-delivery chain
> Grid-Interactive Impacts
> Grid Protection Data center
> Fault / Disturbance Disconnect Reconnect Recovery Grid frequency / voltage excursioins
> Fig. 10. Main instability issues in data centers towards the grid: small- and large-signal stability, forced oscillation, and grid-interactive impacts.

power shelves or equivalent source converters, downstream point-of-load (PoL) converters, and IT loads should be ex-plicitly represented [147]. The key concern is whether the local DC bus remains stable under the source–load impedance coupling, the constant-power-load (CPL)-like behavior, and rapid workload-induced power fluctuations [140], [145]. At the facility level, the internal distribution network is further involved, so the study boundary might cover multiple rack-level PSUs, energy-storage interfaces, electri-cally relevant cooling loads, and grid-side converter devices (UPSs or SSTs) [148]. This level focuses attention on con-verter–converter and converter–network interactions inside the facility, thus capturing phenomena that cannot be inferred from a single rack, such as interactions between UPSs and PSUs, loading asymmetry and power supply transition among normal, double-conversion, bypass, and backup modes [149]. At the system level, the external power system is included together with the data center at the PCC. Modeling of data center internal facilities should reproduce their terminal ac-tive/reactive power responses, input impedance, ride-through characteristics, and protective disconnection/reconnection logic, thus being sufficient to support studies on the impact of weak grid interactions, grid mode excitation, fault ride-through control, voltage and frequency responses, and coordinated load switching [54]. These three tiers are bidirectionally coupled. Workload variations propagate outward from racks to the grid, whereas grid disturbances propagate backward into the data centers [137], [150]. The appropriate tier is determined according to the disturbance origin, dominant interaction, and the variables used to judge stability. Hence, a component can be modeled explicitly in one tier and represented by an equivalent in another. This hierarchical view provides the basis for the stability mechanisms, model fidelity, and assessment methods which will be discussed later. Note that the three-level framework represents stability-study boundaries rather than fixed physical architectures, so it is applicable to both conventional AC-distributed and emerging DC-distributed data centers, although the boundaries between levels may differ. In conventional AC architectures, PSU stages provide a relatively clear dynamic interface be-tween the facility-level distribution network and rack-level DC buses [140]. In DC-distributed architectures, rack buses are connected more directly to a common facility DC network, thereby weakening this separation [89]. As a result, rack- and facility-level stability analyses may partially overlap, although the latter must still retain distribution impedance, multiple racks, and upstream grid-side converters. 

B. Instability Mechanisms 1) Rack-Level DC-Bus Stability: Rack-level instability is primarily governed by the dynamic interaction between the regulated IT loads, the finite energy storage, and the control bandwidth of the rack DC power supply, as summarized in Table VII. Although the upstream source might appear stiff in steady state, its closed-loop output impedance, together with bus capacitance, cable inductance, and downstream PoL con-verter dynamics, determines whether disturbances are damped or amplified [147]. A key mechanism is the constant-power-like behavior of IT loads [151]. Within the effective control bandwidth of downstream converters, the load input current i approximately follows i = P /v, where P is the constant input power con-sumed by the IT load, v is the DC-bus voltage, and small-signal linearization near the steady-state operating point (V , I) 

can yield: 

∆i = − PV2 ∆v (1) Thus, a reduction in bus voltage causes the load to draw more current to maintain its output power, increasing the volt-age drop across the source impedance and further depressing the bus voltage. This negative incremental impedance reduces damping and further destabilizes the system. However, the IT load should not be regarded as an ideal CPL over the entire frequency range. Above the regulating bandwidth, the terminal behavior depends on the PoL converter’s internal dynamics [145]. Note that parallel operation of source- or load-side converters can introduce additional coupling through the common DC bus. Voltage regulation, current sharing, and droop control may create weakly damped modes, even when each converter is stable in isolation [152]. For a rack-level system that is locally stable in the small-signal sense, its large-signal recovery presents different results. Under large workload steps or severe voltage disturbances, the DC-link capacitor must temporarily supply the power imbalance. If the source converter reaches its current limit and cannot supplement the stored energy rapidly, the bus may experience deep voltage excursions or even collapse [145], [153]. 15 ...           

> PSU
> IT loads IT
> loads
> DC
> Bus
> ▪Negative damping due to CPL-like behavior
> ▪Rapid workload-induced power fluctuations
> ▪Source –load impedance coupling
> Rack-Level
> DC Bus Stability
> PDU
> UPS
> Facility-Level Distribution Stability
> PCC
> ▪Interactions between converters
> ▪Loading asymmetry issues
> ▪Power supply Mode transition
> ...
> Data Center
> Facility
> System-Level Interactive Stability
> ▪Weak grid impeance interaction
> ▪Fault ride-through control
> ▪Grid voltage/frequency responses
> ▪Load disconnection/reconnection
> Utility Grid Workload disturbance Power grid disturbance LFT
> IT Rack
> IT Rack
> ...
> AC
> Dist
> Fig. 11. Stability-oriented three-level structure framework of data centers, segmented in terms of rack-level, facility-level, and system-level stability. PCC: Point of Common Coupling; UPS: Uninterruptible Power Supply; PDU: Power Distribution Units; PSU: Power Supply Units; CPL: Constant-power-load.

AI workloads make these mechanisms increasingly relevant because their electrical demand is both rapid and highly synchronized [7]. Slow workload changes mainly shift the operating point and hence the incremental load impedance and stability margin. Abrupt workload transitions can initiate large DC-bus excursions, whereas periodic or synchronized computing activity can act as a sustained excitation of weakly damped rack modes, leading to forced oscillations [154]. When many racks follow correlated power profiles, the re-sulting fluctuations will no longer remain local, but rather propagate through the PSUs and become an input disturbance to the facility distribution system, linking the facility-level issues discussed next. 

2) Facility-Level Distribution Stability: As shown in Ta-ble VII, facility-level instability is mainly caused by the inter-action of multiple regulated converters through a shared distri-bution network. A central mechanism is impedance interaction. The upstream UPS or front-end converter does not behave as an ideal voltage source, while downstream PSUs may exhibit negative or non-passive impedance characteristics. When the magnitude and phase of the source impedance and load impedance become unfavorable near a network or filter res-onance, oscillation might occur [140]. Low-frequency modes are often associated with DC-voltage regulation or constant-power behavior, whereas higher-frequency resonances arise from input filters or digital delays [149]. Large disturbances introduce further nonlinear mechanisms, where grid-voltage dips, rapid workload changes, and UPS mode transfers disturb the power balance between upstream sources and downstream loads, leading to deep bus-voltage excursions and transient oscillations [136], [146]. Normally, a large number of racks are connected in parallel to the distribution network, but aggregating all racks into a sin-gle equivalent load might hide internal modes [155]. A current disturbance in one branch produces a voltage variation on the common bus, which is then sensed by other controlled convert-ers and modifies their power demand. This feedback can create common-mode oscillations involving many racks or more localized differential modes between neighboring UPS–PSU groups [149]. Moreover, in conventional AC-distributed facil-ities, additional coupling may arise from single-phase PSUs connected across a three-phase network. Uneven phase loading and zero-sequence paths can reduce stability margins and produce dynamics that are not captured by balanced positive-sequence models [140]. In DC-distributed architectures, these effects are reduced, but the direct connection of multiple racks to a common DC network strengthens the cross-rack interactions, extending the local rack concerns to the facility-wide DC microgrid stability issues [147], [156]. 

3) System-Level Interactive Stability: At the system level, the dominant issue is the bidirectional dynamic coupling between the data-center facility and the external grid, which is also stated in Table VII. One key mechanism is the in-teraction between the grid impedance and the data center’s aggregated input characteristics. The control dynamics of interface converters affect the inherent grid modes associated with transmission lines, synchronous generators, or renewable energy sources, especially under weak-grid conditions [157], [158]. Thus, an internally stable data center can also excite or amplify an external grid mode, while grid dynamics can in turn destabilize its front-end converters. Periodic workload varia-tions provide another coupling path. Synchronized computing activity can propagate through the internal power-delivery chain and appear at the PCC. If the forcing frequency is close to a weakly damped facility or grid mode, the disturbance will be selectively amplified [137], [144]. During large grid disturbances, such as voltage dips, phase jumps, or frequency events, the grid-interfacing converter may reach its current limit [143], while downstream loads continue to demand nearly constant power. The resulting mismatch must be supplied by DC-link capacitors, UPS batteries, or other storage devices [159]. Insufficient stored energy and inap-propriate mode transitions will cause DC-voltage excursions and eventual fault-ride-through failures. Furthermore, such a severe disturbance event can cause data centers to trip within a short period, producing an abrupt reduction in demand and 16             

> TABLE VII INSTABILITY MECHANISMS IN THE THREE -L EVEL FRAMEWORK OF DATA CENTERS
> System Level Main dynamic interface Dominant destabilizing mechanisms Typical conditions Observable consequence
> Rack level DC bus between PSUs and IT loads Negative incremental impedance; Insufficient DC-link energy buffering; Interaction among parallel converters Large workload step; Source-voltage variation; Control bandwidth overlap DC-bus oscillation; Deep voltage sag or even collapse; Local protection action Facility level Shared AC or DC distribution network Impedance interaction; Unbalanced load and zero-sequence paths; Multi-rack aggregation Uncoordinated workload; Weak internal bus; UPS mode transition Multi-converter resonance; Distribution bus oscillation; Uneven power sharing System level PCC between the interface converter and the external grid Interaction between aggregated data-center and grid dynamics; Workload-induced inherent grid oscillation; Disturbance-driven load transfer Weak-grid operation; Periodic workload excitation; Fault ride-through failure Oscillation at PCC; Abrupt load loss; Voltage/frequency excursion

consequent frequency/voltage excursions [142]. Furthermore, rapid and synchronized load restoration might trigger voltage depression, frequency reduction, and even repeated tripping [150]. System-level stability is therefore governed by a closed disturbance chain in which grid conditions determine the operational responses of data centers, while the resulting power transition modifies the external grid. 

C. Stability Modeling and Assessment Methods 

The wide range of electrical architectures, time scales, and operating modes in data centers makes it difficult to define a universally applicable stability model. Model fidelity should be selected according to the stability phenomenon and the time scale of interest. This section first reviews the hierarchy of models used to represent data-center dynamics and then relates these models to the corresponding stability-assessment methods, as given in Fig. 12. 

1) Stability Modeling: Stability-oriented data-center mod-eling can begin with the representation of computational workload and electrical load, which describe two related but distinct processes. The workload model specifies how the computing activities create a time-varying power request, whereas the electrical model determines how that request appears at the terminals of different levels. Workload demand can be represented by real-world measured data series, or by stepwise/pulsed/periodic profiles, depending on the study objectives (operating-point changes/large transients/sustained excitation) [150]. For example, a recent system-level study has used aggregated AI workload traces as explicit excitation signals for dynamic analysis [137]. The electrical load can be represented at several levels of detail. An ideal CPL provides a concise description of tightly regulated downstream converters and is particularly useful for exposing negative incremental impedance. However, its valid-ity is limited to the frequency band over which the converter can maintain its power demand. More realistic reduced models introduce further considerations, such as finite response times, voltage-dependent behavior, current limits, etc [160]. When the internal control loops materially influence the oscillation mode of interest, the IT load must instead be represented by an averaged converter model, since such a model preserves the key control dynamics without resolving every switching action [136]. After linearization, the averaged models support time-domain state-space and frequency-domain terminal-impedance formulations for small-signal stability analysis. It is worth mentioning that the appropriate frequency-domain models also depend on the electrical structure, where conventional 

dq -domain models are effective for balanced three-phase converters because they transform the fundamental-frequency periodic steady state into a time-invariant operating point [161], but sequence-domain formulations become preferable when positive-, negative-, and zero-sequence channels must be separated and assessed explicitly [149]. For periodically time-varying systems, advanced harmonic linearization models are required [162]. These distinctions are important in data centers because conventional AC architectures combine three-phase UPS equipment with large numbers of single-phase PSUs, whereas future DC architectures shift the dominant coupling toward common DC buses and cascaded DC–DC stages. Thus, the model should follow the relevant port structure rather than apply one coordinate system uniformly across all levels. Large-signal stability studies require models that retain the nonlinear power or energy relationships beyond a single operating point. A common choice is the nonlinear averaged converter model, obtained by averaging the switching behavior but preserving the nonlinear dependence of the system, thus being able to describe the dynamics responsible for equilib-rium recovery after large disturbances [153]. Note that when current limiting or operating-mode transitions are involved, the model must be extended into a piecewise or hybrid representation with mode-dependent equations and transition logic [143]. These nonlinear models provide the basis for the phase-portrait-based state trajectory and Lyapunov-function-based stability analysis as discussed later. Forced-oscillation studies require explicit representation of both the forcing source and the transmission pathway. The excitation source primarily arises from changes in the AI workload, where ideal sinusoidal and square-wave models are easier for resonance analysis, but stochastic periodic work-load models better capture cycle-to-cycle variability and the aggregation of multiple AI tasks [144]. The resulting system responses can be assessed through modal transfer functions to reveal the sensitivity of a given rack to a specific mode [154], or through converter-oriented admittance models to involve 17 Small-Signal              

> Instability
> Linearized
> state-space or
> impedance model
> •Eigenvalue analysis
> •Impedance-Based
> •Passivity analysis
> Im
> Re
> Stability Issue Modeling Assessment
> Nonlinear
> averaged model
> •State trajectory
> •Phase portrait
> •Lyapunov method
> Large-Signal Instability
> Dynamic model with a forcing source and
> propagation path
> •Frequency-response
> •Spectral analysis
> •Modal residue
> Forced Oscillations
> x2
> x1
> |X(f)| f
> Aggregated model
> with load, power transfer and grid-interface dynamics
> •EMT simulation
> •Grid responses
> ft
> Grid-Interactive
> Impacts
> Nyquist criterion
> Fig. 12. Modeling and assessment methods for different data center instability issues.

converter control dynamics [163]. As for grid-interactive impact, it requires an aggregated PCC-oriented model that captures both continuous power dynamics and discrete operating transitions during grid dis-turbances [160]. The event-driven logic should also be elu-cidated, which governs transitions among normal operation, ride-through, disconnection, and restoration. Detailed EMT or switching models remain necessary when the study concerns high-frequency resonances, switching har-monics, or fast faults. However, their computational burden re-stricts the number of devices and the simulation duration [143]. A supraharmonic study illustrates the extreme end of this hier-archy [164], where resolving emissions in the kilohertz range requires explicit switching devices, high-frequency filters, and sufficiently small simulation time steps, whereas such detail would be unnecessary for electromechanical frequency studies. In contrast, for large-scale phasor-domain dynamic studies where the concerned dynamics evolve much more slowly than converter switching, reduced-order positive-sequence models are appropriate. They enable large transmission networks and multiple data centers to be simulated efficiently, but their validity must be checked against a detailed EMT model [137]. Finally, measurement-based data-driven models provide an alternative when proprietary converter parameters are unavail-able. Terminal impedance measurement, transfer-function fit-ting, and system identification can characterize the data center as a black-box dynamic subsystem [140], [165], while modal-identification techniques can extract oscillatory components from operational data [138]. These approaches are valuable for model calibration and event diagnosis, but their conclusions remain dependent on the operating conditions represented in the data. Therefore, they are best regarded as complements to, rather than replacements for, physics-based models. 

2) Stability Assessment Methods: For small-signal stabil-ity, linearized state-space eigenvalue analysis provides direct information on modal frequency, damping, and participation factors. Eigenvalue loci can also be obtained to determine how the stability margin changes with operating conditions [137], [166]. However, the physical origin of a mode may become difficult to interpret, and model order increases sharply in a large system containing many racks and converter stages. Impedance-based analysis offers a more modular alternative [140]. The system is divided at a selected electrical interface, and stability is inferred from the impedance ratio between the two sides by the Nyquist criterion or impedance magni-tude/phase relationships in Bode plots [147]. This approach is particularly suitable for source–load coupling and cascaded conversion stages since each subsystem can be modeled or measured separately. A scalar impedance ratio may be suffi-cient for a DC bus or a single-phase channel, while three-phase and sequence-coupled systems generally require matrix-based formulations and the generalized Nyquist criterion [149]. In addition, passivity-based assessment can further provide a conservative, interface-oriented assessment of stability when the exact grid impedance is uncertain [167]. However, all these methods remain local to the operating point used for linearization and cannot assess whether the system will recover after a sufficiently large disturbance. For large-signal stability, the key question is whether the post-disturbance operating trajectory remains within a re-coverable region. Based on the nonlinear averaged model, phase-portrait-based state trajectory methods can distinguish convergence toward the desired equilibrium from movement toward collapse, and can reveal how the critical boundary changes with load power or stored energy [168]. Lyapunov direct methods provide a more formal interpretation of the same problem. Rather than following one disturbance tra-jectory, they seek a scalar measure that decreases along all trajectories within a specified region. This enables estimation of an attraction region as a sufficient stability boundary, although constructing a useful Lyapunov function becomes difficult for high-order systems [169]. Thus, in practical data-center studies, nonlinear analytical methods are most useful for reduced rack- or converter-level models, while detailed EMT simulation is often needed to verify the resulting conclusions in the complete facility [165]. The assessment of forced oscillations requires separating the excitation source from the dynamic path that amplifies it. Eigenvalues indicate the natural modes of the system, but do not by themselves show whether a particular workload signal can excite those modes. By input–output frequency response analysis from workload power to bus voltage, UPS current, or PCC power, we can identify frequencies at which the internal power-delivery chain acts as an amplifier [154]. When measured waveforms are available, spectral analysis can identify dominant frequency components, while Prony analysis or dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) helps to estimate mode damping [138], [144], [170]. However, measurement alone cannot distinguish a forced oscillation from small-signal oscillation. Hence, forced-oscillation diagnosis is more reliable when frequency-domain propagation analysis is combined with measurement-based modal identification. For grid-side stability impacts, a grid fault may cause the data center facility to remain connected, transfer part of its demand to local storage, or totally disconnect from the grid [143]. These different responses produce different active- and reactive-power trajectories at the PCC and different effects on the external network. Dynamic network simulations are used to evaluate the resulting frequency, voltage, and power-flow 18 • Virtual impedance/capacitor                       

> •Adaptive damping
> •Disturbance feedforward
> •Nonlinearity compensate
> •Local capacitors / battery units
> •Centralized facility-level BESS
> •UPS-BESS
> •Coordinated control
> •Controlled active-power reduction
> •Reactive-current support
> •Soft post-fault recovery
> •Grid frequency support
> ...
> •Power capping
> •Magnitude and ramp limit
> •Load Scheduling
> •Temporal staggering
> Workload-Side Power Smoothing
> Converter-Oriented
> Stabilization
> PSU
> IT loads IT loads Load Power IT loads
> DC Bus
> CPU GPU TPU
> .........Data Center Power Distribution
> PDU
> IT
> Rack IT Rack
> ......
> IT Rack
> Energy Buffering and Coordination
> Virtual impedance Rack-Level ESS Facility-Level BESS
> UPS-BESS
> Ride-through control Grid
> Time
> Load Power Profile
> External Power Grid ...
> PCC Power Grid Data Center Frequency Support
> Ride-Through and
> Grid-Supportive Control
> Virtual impedance Distribution network Power Capping
> IT Rack IT Workloads
> Fig. 13. Stability enhancement strategies for data centers — Detailed implementation measures and typical application scenarios in different system tiers. PCC: Point of Common Coupling; UPS: Uninterruptible Power Supply; BESS: Battery Energy Storage System; PDU: Power Distribution Units; PSU: Power Supply Units;

responses [158]. For instance, sudden disconnection appears to the grid as a loss of demand and may raise system frequency and local voltage, whereas rapid reconnection introduces a new load step that can depress both. The relevant measured metrics depend on the event under study, including frequency extrema, rate of change of frequency, voltage recovery time, and the magnitude and duration of power-flow redistribution [146], [150]. In practice, no single assessment method can cover the full range of data center dynamics. Time-domain simulation results present whether a stability problem occurs, while analytical methods are then needed to explain why it occurs. A credible assessment framework therefore combines event reproduction with a method capable of tracing the observed behavior back to its dominant physical mechanism. 

D. Stability Enhancement Strategies 

Stability enhancement in data centers can intervene at dif-ferent stages of the disturbance path. The appropriate strategy depends on the dominant instability mechanisms. Accordingly, the following discussion organizes the available strategies from workload-side mitigation to grid-interfacing converter control. Their detailed implementation measures and typical application examples are shown in Fig. 13. 

1) Workload-Side Power Smoothing: Workload-side power smoothing seeks to reduce the amplitude and coherence of the disturbance at its computational origin. Rather than allowing server demand to vary freely, computing resources are operated to lower the magnitude and ramp rate of workload transitions, so that the aggregate power profile changes more smoothly. This can mitigate the instantaneous burden placed on rack DC buses and upstream converters. Specifically, power capping or processor-frequency adjustment can provide a relatively direct reduction in demand, while job scheduling acts by delaying, pausing, or reallocating tasks [57]. For workloads running across many servers, temporal staggering can reduce the likelihood that correlated computing activity will produce a coherent power oscillation [7]. More advanced schemes achieve a closed loop between computing operation and elec-trical demand, which use measured facility power, workload status, and external grid requests to determine how much computational flexibility is available without violating service requirements [146]. This result indicates that software-level control can provide a meaningful first layer of power smooth-ing without requiring additional energy-storage hardware. However, workload control is suitable only for schedulable variations and is constrained by computational latency. It is generally too slow to suppress converter resonances or manage the power imbalance caused by a grid fault. As a result, workload-side smoothing serves only as a supplement to other stabilization measures. 

2) Converter-Oriented Stabilization: Converter-oriented stabilization seeks to modify the dynamic behavior presented at an electrical interface of power converters. In small-disturbance conditions, the main objective is to prevent con-verter controls from supplying negative damping near a net-work resonance. Active damping achieves this effect through supplementary feedback, emulating the action of a resistor or impedance without introducing the continuous losses as-sociated with physical damping networks [171]. The method can be implemented at the load converter to counteract the destabilizing negative incremental impedance, or at the source converter to introduce positive damping near a critical reso-nance frequency [172], [173]. A constant virtual resistance applied over a broad frequency range may slow voltage regulation and disturb the power sharing, while frequency-selective virtual impedance addresses this conflict by adding damping mainly around the poorly damped mode [174]. In data center DC networks, the reso-nance frequency may also shift as cable length and rack power 19 

change, so fixed tuning will lose effectiveness, motivating adaptive schemes that estimate the dominant oscillation fre-quency to retune the controller online [175], [176]. Moreover, recent approaches aim at separating stabilization from the main regulation task. One data-center-oriented example uses the flying capacitor of a three-level Buck converter as a controllable oscillation-energy buffer [177]. By redirecting the resonant power into this internal capacitor, the converter input impedance can be reshaped without substantially compro-mising the output dynamics seen by the chip load. Virtual-capacitor methods follow a related principle, synthesizing additional capacitive behavior at source and load ports so that short-term power imbalance is absorbed locally rather than propagated through the bus [178]. During large disturbances, the control objective must in-stead ensure that the converter trajectory remains within a recoverable region, so large-signal stabilization acts directly on the nonlinear power balance. In rack-level systems, load current feedforward can be incorporated into conventional cascaded voltage–current control to provide stability guaran-tees beyond a single operating point [153]. More explicitly nonlinear controllers use the converter states to shape the entire post-disturbance trajectory. Backstepping and feedback-linearization methods compensate the CPL nonlinearity, often with an observer to accommodate uncertain load power [179]. Their practical limitations differ, but the common purpose is a larger region of attraction to prevent the current and DC voltage from crossing the boundary between recovery and collapse. 

3) Energy Buffering and Coordination: By coordinating the internal power-conversion stages and energy buffers in data centers, disturbances can be prevented from propagating through the entire facility. This requires a deliberate allocation of response across different time scales and placements. Local capacitors or backup battery units located close to the rack or low-voltage DC bus can absorb the sharpest transient disturbances before they reach upstream PSUs and distribution feeders [145], while centralized UPS batteries and dedicated energy-storage systems can serve a larger group of loads with higher utilization and facilitate power balance over longer in-tervals [54], [159], but the response is affected by intervening converters and network impedance. Coordination is also needed between storage and the ex-isting UPS infrastructure. Conventional UPS batteries are reserved primarily for continuity of supply, so they need to respond instantaneously when the upstream source can-not maintain the DC link, but should not be responsible for smoothing sustained deviations that would compromise backup capability [143]. A further improvement is to coor-dinate electrical storage with scheduled computing demand, since workload scheduling and battery response serve as different forms of flexibility and need not compete for the same disturbance component. A demonstrated strategy sepa-rates facility power fluctuation by time scale, where workload migration or temporal shift reshapes the portion that can be adjusted without violating service requirements, while UPS storage compensates the residual component subject to state-of-charge and cycling constraints [180]. In addition, the same facility-level controller must coordi-nate recovery after the disturbance. If several UPSs or storage converters recharge simultaneously, the restoration process can create a secondary power step and undo the original smoothing action. The charging power should be ramped and distributed according to the state of charge and the available redundancy [150]. Similar coordination is also required when parallel converters enter current limiting or transfer between normal and backup modes, since uncoordinated transitions may produce circulating power or uneven loading. 

4) Ride-Through and Grid-Supportive Control: As data centers become systemically significant loads, their grid fault ride-through control must satisfy two objectives simultane-ously, i.e., maintaining uninterrupted supply to critical IT loads and avoiding an abrupt loss of demand at the grid inter-face. Conventional UPS protection is designed mainly around equipment-tolerance curves, and normally transfers the facility to backup supply after relatively shallow voltage depressions [143]. However, such a response exacerbates a normally cleared grid fault due to sudden removal of substantial load. Thus, emerging requirements favor controlled continuation of grid connection whenever converter and equipment limits permit [181]. The achievable ride-through control responses depend on the grid-interface device and operating mode. In double-conversion operation of UPS, the front-end rectifier provides a controllable interface through which fault current, active-power draw, and reactive-power exchange can be shaped. In bypass mode, the UPS converter is no longer dynamically interposed between the grid and downstream PSUs, so the facility response depends more directly on load tolerance and transfer logic [136]. In future DC architectures, a central rectifier or SST feeds a common DC network, while storage connected to that bus can support the load without requiring the entire facility to disconnect from the grid [9]. During severe grid disturbances such as voltage sags, the grid-interfacing converter cannot usually maintain full active power without exceeding its current limit. A practical strategy is to reduce active-power import in a controlled manner, reserve part of the available current for reactive support, and make the UPS battery or another local buffer supply the remaining load demand [182]. Moreover, under unbalanced faults, sequence-selective control is needed to avoid excessive negative-sequence current and power oscillations [183]. Post-fault recovery is equally important, because an immediate return to the pre-fault demand may create a second voltage or frequency disturbance. The recovery should be staged and coordinated with DC-link restoration and energy storage [54]. After secure ride-through has been established, the data center facility may further provide deliberate grid support. Under weak-grid conditions, direct power control of the grid-interfacing rectifier can support the PCC voltage via reactive-current control [157]. UPS batteries can rapidly modulate the facility demand to provide fast frequency response [184]. Therefore, ride-through and grid support performance should be specified through the desired power trajectory at the PCC, which makes it imperative to establish a specification for data centers in the future. 20 

V. O UTLOOK 

Building on the discussed grid-to-chip trends in data centers, this chapter outlines the outlooks for technology development: the evolution of computational loads, the grid architecture, how power and information infrastructures are converging, as well as how data centers should be aligned with sustainability from a grid perspective. 

A. Evolving Computational Loads 

Computational loads have been evolving steadily, and the grid-to-data-center consolidation remains to be fully exploited. This section discusses the infrastructural impacts of load evo-lution on the hierarchies, which involve: the scaling challenges associated with computational loads faced by data centers, needs of power supplies for leading-edge and emerging com-puting, as well as the potentials of grid-supportive and grid-interactive data centers emerging from the flexibility of data centers and equipped with energy storage. 

1) Scaling of computational loads: The trend toward larger data centers is driven by the need to train large-scale AI models and the economies of scale associated with power usage effectiveness (PUE). PUE is a metric that measures the ratio of a data center’s total energy consumption EDC to its IT equipment’s energy consumption EIT , indicating how efficiently the data center operates as [185]: 

PUE = EDC 

EIT 

≥ 1.0 (2) Large-scale data centers are known to have lower PUE values. According to [186], between 2010 and 2018, the adoption of hyperscale data centers increased the computing power by 550%, while global data center power consumption rose by only 6%. In an effort to develop more advanced AI models, there is an ever-growing trend toward increasing the number of GPUs used for training. On July 22, 2026, OpenAI announced plans to build a 3.2 GW AI data center in Georgia, called Project Camellia [187]. Furthermore, with the shift toward multimodal AI, which integrates and simultaneously processes and understands not only language but also images, audio, video, code, sensor data, and so on. The number of required parameters and the volume of training data have increased dramatically. The challenge in this direction is the physical constraints of building large-scale data centers and integrating it with power systems. Therefore, methods for distributing AI model training resources across multiple data centers have also been proposed. Google used a large fleet of TPUs across multiple data centers when training the Gemini Ultra model [188]. 

2) Power supply for leading-edge and emerging computing: 

Power supply is also becoming a compelling constraint as computing paradigms scale. Quantum computing, for instance, is promising in terms of computational speed, yet its energy footprint remains to be characterized [189], [190]. Though proof-of-concept results have been reported [191], the require-ments on power supply still need to be confirmed before applications. It is noteworthy that operational conditions also plays a non-negligible role: up-to-date quantum computers require extremely low temperatures (e.g., below 1 K) and stringent noise/electromagnetic conditions [189], [192], [193], thereby posing critical challenges in the power supply design. Likewise, further computing paradigms may introduce new electromagnetic, mechanical, or thermal demands, that should be understood from the underlying physics. 

3) Grid-interactive data centers: A further research di-rection is the evolution of data centers from passive loads into grid-interactive facilities. The coordinated use of flexible computing demand, cooling-system thermal inertia, and energy storage could enable a data center to regulate its power at the PCC in a manner similar to a virtual power plant (VPP) [194], [195]. The key challenge is to ensure that such flexibility does not compromise internal service requirements or introduce new stability risks. At the same time, the dense power electronics inside data centers create an opportunity for converter-embedded grid sensing. Power electronic devices are expected to support local measurement and estimation of key metrics like grid strength, oscillatory modes, voltage unbal-ance, etc, which could be further used for adaptive damping or power-support functions in real time [196], [197]. Realizing this vision will require reliable measurements, cybersecurity safeguards, and standardized rules defining which services a data center can provide without jeopardizing its primary functions. 

B. Evolving Grid Architectures for Data Centers 

The evolution of grid architectures also introduces new opportunities. As the grids move towards distributed operation, lower rotational inertia and more varied interactions, future data centers should still conform to both functionality and standardization that are to be reformed. One example is the emerging SAFEr Grid architecture, and another can be follow-ing standardization considerations like grid specifications and fault-ride-through (FRT) requirements. From a socio-economic perspective, responsibilities are also unraveled that each stake-holder should fulfill regarding the data center consolidation. 

1) The SAFEr Grid infrastructure: As physical inertia of power systems reduces with the rising penetration of dis-tributed energy resources (DERs), the Store-and-Forward Grid (SAFEr Grid) concept proposes compartmentalizing power systems into asynchronous sub-grids (A-grids), which ex-change energy among each other through power electronics energy routers and storage rather than being globally syn-chronized [198]. This promises to improve system resilience and opens new socio-economic opportunities with higher potential energy flexibility. Data centers are a close match for this concept: the power supply chain inside them is already power-electronics-based and frequency-agnostic, and their MV-SST boundary with a backup-battery unit (BBU) is ready to function as energy routers. At its core, data centers embody the "third operational mode" of power systems beyond the conventional islanded or grid-connected modes, where A-grids operate "autonomously" from an energy perspective but remain physically interconnected as SAFEr Grid introduces— data centers are desired to isolate the internal power fluctu-ation to ensure grid stability, and vice versa. In this context, 21 Grid (More A-Grids) A-Grids: Asynchronous Grids with local control & energy routing 

> Energy
> Storage Power Electronics Energy Router Coordination via Communication Interactive Agents, e.g., Household Prosumers, Electric Vehicles (EVs), Distributed Energy Resources (DERs), Data Centers...
> Fig. 14. The Store-and-Forward energy routing for future asynchronous power grids (the SAFEr Grid architecture) that aims to maximize the exploitation of energy flexibility in asynchronous sub-grids (A-grids) [198]. Data centers inherently align with the concept by virtue of the power supply facilities.

data centers can be positioned as a representative near-ready proving ground for the concept, though the realization requires the internal hierarchy to address both the functionality of data center loads and energy-routing resilience commitments in the society as introduced from system level. 

2) Grid specifications of data centers: For ride-through and grid-supportive requirements of data centers, directly copying generator-side requirements may be inappropriate because a data center remains an uninterruptible load whose internal energy reserve is finite and whose protection was originally designed around continuity of service [199]. The specification should define the admissible load reduction during a distur-bance, the active–reactive current priority, the duration sup-ported by local storage, and the permitted post-fault recovery rate [182]. It should also recognize differences among central-ized UPS systems, bypass-operated AC systems, distributed backup systems, and emerging DC architectures [9]. A fit-for-purpose requirement should ensure that the facility remains secure, while preventing its transfer or recovery logic from amplifying the original grid disturbance [10]. 

3) Requirements on FRT capability: Fig. 15 shows a pro-posal and examples of the application of the under-voltage FRT requirements in grid codes for large-scale demand, in-cluding data centers, as defined by TSOs. In December 2025, ENTSO-E issued a recommendation urging European TSOs to establish common connection requirements for data centers, including FRT requirements [38]. As of July 2026, ERCOT, AESO, Energinet, and RTE are applying FRT requirements for loads connected via transmission lines [39], [40], [200]. EirGrid has submitted a proposal and is awaiting final approval from the regulatory authority [41]. Energinet, EirGrid, and AESO require that the connection be maintained for 150 ms even if the voltage drops to 0%. RTE requires maintaining the connection for 150 ms when the voltage drops to 5%. RTE and Energinet relax the voltage levels at which connection main-tenance is required in proportion to the elapsed time. Other grid codes establish stepped connection voltage requirements over time. PSUs are designed to meet the connection maintenance time requirements for voltage sags established by the Information 20       

> 40
> 0
> Voltage [V]
> 0500 1000 1500 2000
> Time [ms]
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 2500 3000
> Energinet Grid Code
> Eirgrid Proposal
> AESO Grid Code
> ERCOT Grid Code
> ENTSO-E Recommendation
> Voltage Range for PSU Operation
> RTE Grid Code
> 3500
> Fig. 15. Planned and ongoing Fault-Ride Through (FRT) requirements for Data Centers [38]–[41], [200].

Technology Industry Council (ITIC). The ITIC requirements stipulate that operation must be guaranteed for up to 50 ms when the voltage drops to 70% of its nominal level, and for up to 10 seconds when it drops to 80% of its nominal level [201]. Therefore, data centers must implement measures to ensure stable PSU operation even during transient voltage drops that fall below these thresholds. 

4) Responsible parties for data center integration: The responsibility of power system operators lies in ensuring transparent information disclosure and establishing new grid connection rules and technical requirements. EU has noted that insufficient transparency in disclosing information such as available grid capacity delays progress on data center projects [22]. The EU Grid Action Plan calls for ENTSO-E and the EU DSO Entity to develop a joint portal that will collect and publish hosting capacity information across Europe, im-prove comparability, and support more informed investment decisions at a European scale [54]. To prevent speculative data center construction applications and the circumvention of rules, effective prioritization rules and queue management are essential in addition to capacity transparency. It is also necessary to update the technical requirements of grid codes for emerging loads, including data centers. In Ireland, an incident occurred on June 6, 2026, in which 480 MW, equivalent to 52% of the country’s data center demand, was disconnected as a result of a single-phase fault at the 220 kV substation in central Dublin [202]. This incident shows that FRT-incompatible demand increases the risk to power-system stability. Data center developers and operators must ensure com-pliance with grid codes and achieve grid congestion relief and carbon-aware data center operations. To alleviate grid congestion and enable carbon-aware operations, it is necessary to unlock the flexibility in both the physical resources and computational algorithms within the data center. 

C. Convergent Power-Information Infrastructures 

Going beyond the conventional paradigm, a novel insight is that the boundary between power and information in-frastructures is diminishing: power and information interacts at progressive dimensions, and re-purposing either channel 22 

to carry the other’s traffic enables extra flexibility for task migration within the same infrastructure, promisingly pushing the frontier of data center design compactness or sustainability. We elaborate these insights along the following directions: 

1) Cybersecurity: Cybersecurity in data center systems spans both Information-Technology (IT) and Operational-Technology (OT) scenarios from IT racks to power supply hardware. Beyond the pure data concerns intrinsic to the data centers themselves [203] and associated energy footprints [204], this power-information infrastructure faces operational and energy challenges from hardware spoofing—typically false data injection attacks (FDIAs) or denial-of-service (DoS), etc [205]—at data center infrastructure management (DCIM) platforms/facilities, the grid, as well as power electronics inter-faces. Firstly, as remote coordination is increasingly deployed, exposure to the internet or similar connectivity opens the attack surface with entry points of false control commands. The consequences differ by target: attacks on data center manage-ment primarily degrade service quality or trigger operational malfunctions, whereas attacks on grids or power electronics converters propagate more rapidly at rack and system level, compromising data center operation [206], [207] or even pushing the system across its stability boundaries [205], [208]. Secondly, considering the scale of data center loads, the impact can also run the opposite way, that abnormal behaviors induced by cyber attacks may escalate into load contingencies that threaten the resilience of local grids [209], [210]. Similarly, as smart UPS systems become more prevalent—especially when aligning the aforementioned SAFEr Grid infrastructure—their energy-management functions represent another point of con-cern, potentially adding to IT downtime on one side or grid-level faults on the other. It is therefore essential to understand the underlying mechanisms driving these coupled cyber-power vulnerabilities and to address them strategically at their source. 

2) Power line data transmission: Power line data trans-mission, developed as power line communication (PLC) or talkative power, superimposes information onto the voltages and/or currents for power delivery ("power signals"), such that it can be detected by a receiver on another end purely through transmission lines [211]–[213]. This has been used, for instance, in smart metering or remote control in microgrids [214], [215]. For data center specifically, where every layer of the power chain is already densely instrumented with power electronics and essentially digital controlled, power line data transfer represents a low-incremental-cost way to utilize the power layers for data transfer, defining "new" information channels that improve system compactness and add resilience against communication-network outages. 

3) Local power-over-fiber/photonic delivery: As rack power density continues to rise, power-over-fiber addresses the resulting challenges in copper volume and electromagnetic isolation (both galvanic isolation and EMI) [216], [217], par-ticularly at the chip level, while photonic interconnects aim to scale data centers past the constraints of latency and bandwidth of electrical interconnects [218], [219]. Both are most relevant where power and/or information density are simultaneously the first-order design requirements. Although still maturing, the two directions are worth treating as candidate solutions Data Centers Data Centers Power to Computing Y12 Y21 Y24 Y34 AI Encoder Data Inputs/ Computing Tasks Power Delivery Data Propagation  

> Fig. 16. Conceptual illustration of computing on power infrastructure. Data centers are projected to harness the intrinsic dynamics of a power grid that perform the transformation of encoded data alongside normal power delivery, thus capitalizing on the interactivity between the utility power network and data centers.

more than merely a convenience, serving in future data-center physics where copper-based delivery may become a binding constraint. 

4) Physical/analog computing concept: Another concep-tually distinct yet speculative direction exploits the shared physics of power and information transformation, and exploits them algorithmically. Inspired by the physical/analog com-puting initiatives [220]–[222], power electronics-penetrated infrastructure can itself serve as a computing substrate—a preliminary DC-grid implementation of fundamental affine transformation is reported in [223]. With data encoded into system perturbations, the underlying physical laws governing the voltage-current dynamics in the network perform an in-herent computing mechanism alongside normal power flow, as depicted in Fig. 16. The same control logic could support outsourcing of computing load or self-referential coordination of server workload or power delivery, eventually closing the loop between the physical power layer and the computational demand it serves, with attendant efficiency and sustainability benefits. 

D. Sustainable Data Centers in Power Grids 

The carbon footprints of data centers have been increasingly underscored as an initiative for participating in the global energy infrastructure sustainably and responsibly. According to [224], data center electricity consumption in the United States is projected to reach approximately 250 TWh by 2025, and monetary damages from air pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from data centers are estimated to account for approximately 5% of GDP. In Europe, an initiative aiming for carbon neutrality by 2030 has been formed, with more than 100 data center operators and trade associations participating. This agreement advocates for the certification of data centers’ PUE, the procurement of 100% carbon-free energy, water conservation, and the reuse of waste heat [225]. 23 

In this section, we introduce ongoing efforts and outlooks on reducing the carbon footprints of data centers, including carbon-aware computing and sustainability initiatives for data center equipments. An overview of the cost allocation for these de-carbonization measures is also provided. 

1) Carbon footprint of computing tasks and carbon-aware computing: GHG emissions from data center operations are determined by the GHG emission intensity of the electricity used to power the data centers, which is a factor that varies by time and location. Google actually allocates workloads to minimize GHG emissions from electricity used by its data cen-ters through the Carbon Intelligent Computing System (CICS), designed to minimize GHG emissions from the electricity used by data centers. The system predicts data center demand and the grid’s carbon intensity one day in advance and aims to reduce CO 2 emissions by flexibly allocating workloads across the data center fleet. In this example, enabling CICS has been shown to reduce average cluster power consumption by 1–2% during the highest-carbon hour [226]. Research in [227] proposes methods to implement carbon-aware computing for tasks such as offline data processing, model training, and simulation pipelines. Research in [228] evaluates the carbon footprint across the AI lifecycle. According to this research, the proportion of emissions attributable to computing tasks and hardware varies depending on model size. In particular, for large-scale models, the study shows that operational inference has a higher carbon footprint than training. Research in [229] proposes an algo-rithm for carbon-aware scheduling of training and inference workloads across multiple AI data centers. Simulation con-firms that scheduling across three AI data center parks, while considering continuity-constrained workloads, can decrease operating costs by at least 1.69% and carbon emissions by 4.5% compared to four alternative schemes, while maintaining computational tractability. Furthermore, it is important to consider the allocation of computational tasks while accounting for two constraints: grid congestion and carbon footprint. Fig. 17 compares the carbon intensity of major data center hub cities, listed in Table III, by Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), using data from Electricity Maps [230]. Three time slots, 3 AM, 11 AM, and 7 PM on August 12th, 2026, are selected. During the day-time, when solar power generation increases, carbon intensity decreases compared to the evening and nighttime. Therefore, at night, when carbon intensity is higher, allocating workloads to regions where it is daytime at the same time is an effective way to reduce emissions associated with computing. 

2) Cost allocation for carbon-aware computing: Cost allo-cation among stakeholders in carbon-aware computing varies by data center type. In data centers owned by cloud ser-vice providers, such as hyperscale data centers, the service provider can be responsible for managing the data center’s power consumption and carbon footprint. In fact, Google has demonstrated carbon-aware computing across its fleet of owned data centers [59]. Additionally, cloud service providers can include carbon footprint-related charges in their cloud service fees. Even in enterprise data centers built by companies for their own use, the companies themselves can manage the 400            

> 600
> 0
> Carbon Intensity [g CO2/kWh]
> 3:00 11:00 19:00
> Time (UTC)
> Morning (5 am – 10 am)
> Evening (4 pm – 8 pm)
> 200
> Nighttime (8 pm – 5 am)
> Daytime (10 am – 4 pm) Local Time :
> Alberta
> Dallas
> Virginia
> Dublin
> London
> Frankfult
> Mumbai
> Beijing
> Perth
> Tokyo
> Osaka
> Sydney
> Alberta
> Dallas
> Virginia
> Dublin
> London
> Frankfult
> Mumbai
> Beijing
> Perth
> Tokyo
> Osaka
> Sydney
> Alberta
> Dallas
> Virginia
> Dublin
> London
> Frankfult
> Mumbai
> Beijing
> Perth
> Tokyo
> Osaka
> Sydney
> Fig. 17. Comparison of carbon intensity of electricity in major data center hub cities by Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), August 12th, 2026, obtained from Electricity Maps [230].

data center’s carbon footprint. On the other hand, in the case of colocation data centers, the data center operator enters into a power supply contract, and that cost is incorporated into the usage fees charged to client companies. Methods for allocating the costs of carbon-aware computing among multiple client companies using computing resources have been proposed, such as data center operators offering voluntary bidding programs to tenants [231]. VI. C ONCLUSION 

AI data centers are emerging as large, dynamic, and power electronics-dominated electrical infrastructures whose scalable deployment cannot be assessed through energy consumption and peak demand alone. Their grid impact is determined by the coupled behavior of computing workloads, power-delivery architectures, cooling systems, and energy buffers. This article provides a comprehensive overview of the resulting challenges from grid connection to chip-level regulation. It shows that interconnection capacity, equipment lead times, and evolv-ing grid codes increasingly constrain data-center deployment, while workload orchestration, cooling, on-site resources, and energy buffers can provide conditional spatio-temporal flexi-bility. It further highlights the transition toward higher-voltage DC architectures, solid-state transformers, wide-bandgap de-vices, advanced chip-level power delivery, and liquid cool-ing. The proposed rack–facility–system framework clarifies that stability must be addressed across multiple boundaries: workload-induced variations and constant power load effects can challenge rack-level DC buses; converter interactions and mode transitions can affect facility-level operation; whereas fault ride-through, load transfer, disconnection, and restoration can affect grid voltage and frequency. Several future trends are outlined in this article. For data center operators, compute scheduling, energy buffering, con-verter control, and reliability management should be coor-dinated to define a predictable power envelope at the point of common coupling, including ramping, flexibility, ride-through, recovery behaviors, cyber-physical resilience, and carbon awareness. For system operators and regulators, AI data centers should be represented as dynamic, potentially 24 

flexible resources rather than fixed demand, with connec-tion arrangements and grid codes that recognize verifiable flexibility, power quality, fault ride-through, and staged post-fault restoration. Ultimately, grid-to-chip co-design provides a principled pathway for scaling AI infrastructure from grid integration challenges into a controllable, reliable and efficient 

grid-supportive resource .REFERENCES [1] OpenAI, “AI and Compute,” May 2018, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/ai-and-compute/ [2] International Energy Agency (IEA), “Key Questions on Energy and AI,” https://www.iea.org/reports/key-questions-on-energy-and-ai, Aug. 2026, accessed: Sep. 1, 2026. [3] Jones Lang LaSalle Incorporated (JLL), “2026 Global Data Center Market Outlook – Navigating AI demand, power constraints and global opportunities in 2026,” Jan. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.jll.com/en-us/insights/market-outlook/data-center-outlook [4] IEA, “Overcoming Energy Constraints is Key to Delivering on Europe’s Data Centre Goals,” Nov. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/commentaries/overcoming-energy-constraints-is-key-to-delivering-on-europe-s-data-centre-goals [5] IEA, “Building the Future Transmission Grid: Strategies to Navigate Supply Chain Challenges,” Feb. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/744ff0bb-905a - 4f9f - 83e3 - 2d04ce99e09c / BuildingtheFutureTransmissionGrid . pdf [6] NVIDIA, “How New GB300 NVL72 Features Provide Steady Power for AI,” Jul. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/how-new-gb300-nvl72-features-provide-steady-power-for-ai/ [7] E. Choukse, B. Warrier, S. Heath et al. , “Power Stabilization for AI Training Datacenters,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14318 , pp. 1–10, Aug. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14318 [8] S. Lee, R. P. Wojda, C.-H. Jo et al. , “Toward Next-Generation AI Data Centers: Power Delivery Architecture Shifts, Emerging Technologies, and Challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25095 , pp. 1–18, Jun. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.25095 [9] Open Compute Project (OCP), “Data Center Facility – Low Voltage Direct Current Power Distribution,” Mar. 2026, version 1.0, accessed: Jul., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.opencompute. org/documents/dcf-power-distribution-lvdc-white-paper-version-1-0-final-pdf-1 [10] North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), “Risk Mitigation for Emerging Large Loads,” May 2026, accessed: August, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc.com/globalassets/our-work/guidelines/reliability/RG_Risk-Mitigation-For-Emerging-Large-Loads.pdf [11] EirGrid and System Operator for Northern Ireland (SONI), “Large Demand Facility Fault Ride-Through Issue and Proposed Solutions,” EirGrid and SONI Information Paper, Version 2.0, Nov. 2025, accessed: August, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cms.eirgrid.ie/sites/default/files/publications/MPID345- Large-Demand-Facility-Fault-Ride-Through-Issue-and-Proposed-Solutions-EirGrid-and-SONI-Information-Paper-November-2025.pdf [12] A. Chatterji, T. Cunningham, D. J. Deming et al. , “How People Use ChatGPT,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep. Working Paper 34255, Sept. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nber.org/papers/w34255 [13] IEA, “Global Data Centre Electricity Consumption by Sensitivity Case, 2020-2035,” 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai/energy-demand-from-ai [14] O. Kay, R. Reaser, and R. Taylor, “Processing Power: The Effect of Data Centers on Wholesale Electricity Markets,” Mar. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.dallasfed. org/~/media/documents/research/papers/2026/wp2606.pdf [15] Federal Reserve Bank of ST. Louis, “Average Price: Electricity per Kilowatt-Hour in U.S. City Average,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/APU000072610 [16] Cushman & Wakefield Research, “2026 Global Data Center Market Comparison,” 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https : / / digital . cushmanwakefield . com/globaldatacentermarketcomparison- 05- 2026- global- central- en-content-mrsrch-datacentres/13/ [17] FTI Consulting, “Current Power Trends and Implications for the Data Center Industry,” Jun. 2024, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.fticonsulting.com/insights/articles/ current-power-trends-implications-data-center-industry [18] C. K. Jacobsen, “New Report: Data Center Growth Continues in Denmark, but Grid Constraints and Queue Data Distort the Picture,” May 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www. datacenterindustrien.dk/new- report- data- center- growth- continues- in-denmark-but-grid-constraints-and-queue-data-distort-the-picture [19] City of Detroit, “Resolution Opposing the Usage of Water Resources for Data Centers,” Jul. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://pub-detroitmi.escribemeetings.com/ filestream.ashx?DocumentId=273123 [20] Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority (YCUA), “Director’s Letter: Agenda Items - YCUA Board Meeting of April 22, 2026,” Apr. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cms3.revize.com/revize/ypsilantiwater/Documents/ About/Board%20of%20Commissioners/Agendas%20And%20Minutes/ 2026/2026- 04- 22%20Board%20Packet.pdf?t=202604171058310&t= 202604171058310 [21] Energinet, “Grid Connection Process: Demand Connection Code (the DCC Regulation) – Connection of Demand Facilities and Distribution Systems in the Transmission Grid,” Feb. 2019, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://en.energinet.dk/media/ihhhdqnz/ dcc- grid- connection- process- for- demand- facilities- and- distribution-systems-revision-1.pdf [22] European Commission, “Commission Notice: Guidance on Efficient and Timely Grid Connections,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/ PDF/?uri=CELEX:52025XC06703 [23] Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), “20221129-3092: Order Accepting Tariff Revisions Subject to Condition to PJM Inter-connection,” Nov. 2022, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.wrightlaw.com/wp- content/uploads/2024/01/ORDER-ACCEPTING-TARIFF-REVISIONS-SUBJECT-TO-CONDITION.pdf [24] T. Norris, T. Profeta, D. Patino-Echeverri, and A. Cowie-Haskell, “Rethinking Load Growth: Assessing the Potential for Integration of Large Flexible Loads in US Power Systems,” Nicholas Institute for Energy, Environment & Sustainability, Duke University, Tech. Rep. NI R 25-01, Feb. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://nicholasinstitute. duke.edu/sites/default/files/publications/rethinking-load-growth.pdf [25] Department for Energy Security & Net Zero, United Kingdom, “Accelerating Electricity Network Connections for Strategic Demand,” Mar. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/accelerating-electricity-network - connections - for- strategic - demand / accelerating - electricity -network-connections-for-strategic-demand-accessible-webpage [26] 50Hertz, Amprion, TenneT Germany and TransnetBW, “Reifegradverfahren für Netzanschlüsse an das Übertra-gungsnetz (in German),” Jun. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https : / / www. netztransparenz . de / Portals/1/Dokumente/Reifegradverfahren/Vier%20U%CC%88NB%20-%20Reifegradverfahren%20- %20Verfahrensdokumentation%20V1.2. pdf?ver=a9hDxjr0lW3rZJbMRnkcfA%3d%3d [27] Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), “PUCT Approves ERCOT’s Batch Zero Process for Connecting Large Electricity Users While Protecting System Reliability for Texans,” 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ercot.com/news/release/ 06182026-puct-approves-ercots [28] The Netherlands Authority for Consumers and Markets, “Giving Priority to Projects That Contribute to Major Social Objectives Remains Possible with the New Prioritization Framework,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.acm.nl/ en/publications/acm-giving-priority-projects-contribute-major-social-objectives-remains-possible-new-prioritization-framework [29] Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) in Japan, Agency for Natural Resources and Energy, “Ensuring Compliance with Regulations Regarding Large-Scale Local Demand (in Japanese),” Jun. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //www.meti.go.jp/shingikai/enecho/denryoku_gas/saisei_kano/smart_ power_grid_wg/pdf/011_01_00.pdf 25 

[30] DSO Entity, “Joint Progress Report on Capacitypedia,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Avail-able: https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public- cdn-container/clean- documents/Publications/grid- action- plan/ENTSO- E_ TSO_DSO_Joint_Progress_Report.pdf [31] Energinet, “Kapacitetskort (in Danish),” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.energinet.dk/el/eltransmissionsnettet/ kapacitetskort/ [32] De Staat van Groningen, “Indicatoren Capaciteit Elektriciteit-snet (in Dutch),” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://destaatvangroningen.nl/omgevingsmonitor-gebruik-energie-netwerkcapaciteit.html [33] Electricity Supply Board (ESB) Networks, “Availability Capacity Heatmap,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //www.esbnetworks.ie/services/get- connected/renewable- connection/ network-capacity-heatmap [34] National Grid, “Network Opportunity & Development Map,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Avail-able: https://commercial.nationalgrid.co.uk/network-opportunity-map-application?mapid=networkCapacityMap [35] Ofgem, “Access and Forward-Looking Charges Significant Code Review: Final Decision,” pp. 1–88, May 2022, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/sites/default/ files/2022-05/Access%20SCR%20-%20Final%20Decision.pdf [36] PJM, “Board Decisional Letter on Critical Issue Fast Path - Large Load Additions,” Jan. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.pjm.com/-/media/DotCom/about-pjm/who-we-are/public-disclosures/2026/20260116-pjm-board-letter-re-results-of-the-cifp-process-large-load-additions.pdf [37] Commission for Regulation of Utilities in Ireland, “Large Energy Users Connection Policy,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [On-line]. Available: https://cruie-live-96ca64acab2247eca8a850a7e54b-5b34f62.divio- media.com/documents/CRU2025236_Large_Energy_ User_connection_policy_decision_paper.pdf [38] European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E), “ENTSO-E Position on the Need for National Connection Requirements to Ensure EU Power System Stability,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Avail-able: https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public- cdn-container/clean- documents/Publications/Position%20papers%20and% 20reports/2025/251211_SDC_Position_paper_on_CNC_2.0.pdf [39] Energinet, “Technical Regulation 3.4.3: Requirements for Transmission-Connected Demand Facilities,” Sept. 2024, ac-cessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://en. energinet.dk/media/bkpf4hef/technical- regulation- 343- requirements-for-transmission-connected-demand-facilities-revision-1.pdf [40] RTE, “Documentation Technique de Référence: Article 8.3.5 –Cahier des Charges des Capacités Constructives d’une Installation de Consommation (in French),” Feb. 2024, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.services- rte.com/files/live/ sites/services- rte/files/documentsLibrary/Article_8.3.5__CdC_des_ capacites_constructive_d_une_installation_de_consommateurs_1897_ fr [41] EirGrid, “Grid Code Modification Recommendation Form: MPID 345 Fault Ride Through, Rate of Change of Frequency and Post Fault Active Power Recovery for Demand Facilities,” Dec. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cms. eirgrid.ie/sites/default/files/publications/MPID345-Demand-Facilities-FRT-Recommendation-Paper-01042026.pdf [42] TenneT, “Netzanschlussregeln: Power to Gas Demand Units Anhang-E (in German),” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.tennet.eu/de/strommarkt/kunden-deutschland/netzkunden/ netzanschlussregeln [43] Energy Systems Integration Group (ESIG), “Integrating Large Loads – Performance Requirements,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.esig.energy/attachment/serve/integrating-large-loads-performance-requirements-ahmed-rashwan [44] PJM, “Interim Resource Adequacy Service Proposal: A Reliability Framework for Rapid Large Load Growth,” 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.pjm.com/-/media/DotCom/ about- pjm/newsroom/fact- sheets/interim- resource- adequacy- service-proposal.pdf [45] State of Texas, “Texas Senate Bill 6,” Jun. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://legiscan.com/TX/text/SB6/id/ 3172978 [46] Alberta Electric System Operator (AESO), “Consolidated Written Feedback: Connection Requirements for Transmission-Connected Data Centres,” 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://ehq- production- canada.s3.ca- central-1 . amazonaws . com / 146f5948d925951940bc80097349547eb6e4a150 / original/1761754348/ec62e21bea2de720f7164ca8310b79d8_TCDC% 20Standards%20-%20Consolidated%20Written%20Feedback.pdf [47] National Energy System Operator for Great Britain (NESO), “Written Evidence submitted by NESO to the Environmental Audit Committee,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://committees.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/166090/pdf/ [48] TenneT, “Time-dependent transport rights (TDTR),” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.tennet.eu/nl- en/time-dependent-transport-rights-tdtr [49] M. R. Monterde, E. F. Alvarez, and O. Valarezo, “Non-firm Grid Connections: A Review of Access Types, Mechanisms, and Regulatory Frameworks,” Curr. Sustainable/Renewable Energy Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 23, 2025. [50] Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), “DCFLEX: Data Center Flexible Load Initiative,” Sept. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://restservice.epri.com/publicdownload/ 000000003002031004/0/Product [51] A. Wierman, Z. Liu, I. Liu, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Opportunities and challenges for data center demand response,” in Proc. International Green Computing Conference , 2014, pp. 1–10. [52] J. R. L. Senga, S. Wang, and C. R. Knittel, “Flexible Data Centers Reduce Power System Costs but Can Increase Emissions,” iScience ,vol. 29, no. 7, 2026. [53] M. T. Takci, M. Qadrdan, J. Summers, and J. Gustafsson, “Data Centres as a Source of Flexibility for Power Systems,” Energy Rep. , vol. 13, pp. 3661–3671, 2025. [54] ENTSO-E, “Data Centres and the Power System: Expected Trends, Challenges and Opportunities,” ENTSO-E, May 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://eepublicdownloads. blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/Reports/ 2026/ENTSO-E_Data_Centres_260520.pdf [55] R. Basmadjian, F. Niedermeier, and H. de Meer, “Demand-Side Flexibility and Supply-Side Management: The Use Case of Data Centers and Energy Utilities,” in Engineering and Management of Data Centers: An IT Service Management Approach . Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Nov. 2017, pp. 187–204. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-65082-1_9 [56] P. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Yan et al. , “Demand Flexibility Quantification for Data Centers: A Chance Constrained Bi-Level Model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 5079–5090, May-Jun. 2026. [57] P. Colangelo, A. K. Coskun, J. Megrue et al. , “AI Data Centres as Grid-Interactive Assets,” Nat. Energy , vol. 11, pp. 254–261, Feb. 2026. [58] S. Samsi, “The MIT Supercloud Dataset,” 2021, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://registry.opendata.aws/dcc/ [59] V. Mehra and R. Hasegawa, “Supporting Power Grids with Demand Response at Google Data Centers,” Google Cloud, Tech. Rep., Oct. 2023, accessed: July 8th, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/infrastructure/using- demand-response-to-reduce-data-center-power-consumption [60] A. Khosravi, O. R. Sandoval, M. S. Taslimi et al. , “Review of Energy Efficiency and Technological Advancements in Data Center Power Systems,” Energy Build. , vol. 323, p. 114834, 2024. [61] V. Kambhampati, A. v. d. Dobbelsteen, and J. Schild, “Moving Beyond Diesel Generators: Exploring Renewable Backup Alternatives for Data Centers,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. , vol. 2929, no. 1, p. 012008, 2024. [62] M. Dayarathna, Y. Wen, and R. Fan, “Data Center Energy Consumption Modeling: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 732–794, 2015. [63] Y. Zhang, H. Tang, H. Li, and S. Wang, “Unlocking the Flexibilities of Data Centers for Smart Grid Services: Optimal Dispatch and Design of Energy Storage Systems under Progressive Loading,” Energy , vol. 316, p. 134511, 2025. [64] L. Li, Y. Pu, Y. Ju, Z. Hu, and Z. Wang, “Coordinating Multiple UPS Batteries in Datacenter for Load Flexibility and Cost Reduction,” 

Energy Build. , vol. 359, p. 117282, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778826003427 [65] P. P. Gyang, P. Chakraborty, L. Meegahapola, and X. Yu, “Grid-Integrated Data Centers: Architectures, Modeling, Interconnection Re-quirements, Challenges, and Opportunities,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Elec-tron. Soc. , vol. 7, pp. 1080–1112, Jun. 2026. [66] Y. Li, M. Mughees, Y. Chen, and Y. R. Li, “The Unseen AI Dis-ruptions for Power Grids: LLM-induced Transients,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11416 , 2024. 26 

[67] C. Williams, P. Colangelo, A. Coskun et al. , “Power-Flexible AI Data Centers: A New Paradigm for Grid-Responsive Compute,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25098 , 2026. [68] UK Power Networks, “Data Centre Profiles,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/data-centre-profiles-2yo3y [69] IEA, “Energy and AI,” Apr. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/de9dea13-b07d-42c5-a398-d1b3ae17d866/EnergyandAI.pdf [70] Organization for Cross-regional Coordination of Transmission Operators in Japan (OCCTO), “Outlook for Electricity Supply–Demand and Cross-regional Interconnection Lines: Actual Data for Fiscal Year 2022,” Dec. 2023, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.occto.or.jp/en/assets/information_disclosure/outlook_of_ electricity_supply-demand/files/231228_outlook_for_electricity.pdf [71] C. E. Kelly, J. A. Ging, A. Kansal, and M. P. Walsh, “Balancing Power Systems With Datacenters Using a Virtual Interconnector,” IEEE Power Energy Technol. Syst. J. , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 51–59, 2016. [72] Y. Weng, Y. Liu, R. L. T. Lim, and H. D. Nguyen, “Distributed energy resource exploitation through co-optimization of power system and data centers with uncertainties during demand response,” Sustainability ,vol. 15, no. 14, p. 10995, 2023. [73] NERC, “2025 Summer Reliability Assessment,” May 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc. com/globalassets/programs/rapa/ra/nerc_sra_2025.pdf [74] NESO, “NESO Winter Outlook 2024-25 Data Workbook,” Jun. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.neso. energy/document/362986/download [75] ENTSO-E, “Statistical Factsheet 2025,” Jun. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://eepublicdownloads.blob. core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/Publications/ Statistics/Factsheet/entsoe_sfs2025_web.pdf [76] EMBER, “Evolution of China’s RAC Ownership and its Implication on Electricity Consumption,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://ember-energy.org/latest-insights/chinas-consumer-goods- trade- in- accelerating- cooling- efficiency- in- a- warmer- climate/ chapter-2-market-background/ [77] METI, “Electricity Supply and Demand This Summer and Forecasts and Operations for This Winter (in Japanese),” Oct. 2024, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.meti.go.jp/shingikai/ enecho/denryoku_gas/denryoku_gas/pdf/082_04_00.pdf [78] T.-G. Kim, S.-G. Yoon, and K.-B. Song, “Very Short-term Load Forecasting Model for Large Power System Using GRU-attention Algorithm,” Energies , vol. 18, no. 13, p. 3229, 2025. [79] Ministry of Power in India, “India Meets All-Time Highest Peak Power Demand of 256 GW Without Shortage,” Apr. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.pib.gov.in/ PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2256313&reg=3&lang=1 [80] Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO), “Quarterly Energy Dynamics Q1 2024 April 2024,” Apr. 2024, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.aemo.com.au/-/media/files/ major-publications/qed/2024/qed-q1-2024.pdf [81] Electricity Authority Te Mana Hiko, “Wholesale Reports: Duration Curves,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.emi.ea.govt.nz/Wholesale/Reports/KPGKJ1?DateFrom= 20240101&DateTo=20241231&_si=v |3[82] EirGrid Group, “Annual Report 2024,” Jun. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cms.eirgrid.ie/sites/default/ files/publications/20108%20EIRG%20Annual%20Report%202024_ Digital_AW.pdf [83] SONI, “Winter Outlook 2025-26,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cms.soni.ltd.uk/sites/default/files/publications/SONI_ Winter_Outlook_Final.pdf [84] Danish Energy Agency, “Danish Electricity Market Implementation Plan According to Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 on the Internal Market for Electricity ,” Sept. 2025, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://ens.dk/media/7817/download [85] F. Billimoria and C. Byers, “Bits-to-Watts: Connecting Markets and Prices for Compute and Power,” United States Association for Energy Economics (USAEE), Tech. Rep. USAEE Working Paper No. 26-678, Jul. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm?abstract_id=7207959 [86] P. T. Krein, “Data Center Challenges and Their Power Electronics,” 

CPSS Trans. Power Electron. Appl. , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 39–46, Mar. 2017. [87] M. Baghaie, “The Path to Megawatt Server Racks and DC Microgrids,” PCIM Magazine, Jun. 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://pcim.mesago.com/nuernberg/en/pcim-insights/pcim-magazine/ the-path-to-megawatt-server-racks-and-dc-microgrids.html [88] A. Shaukat, “The Evolution in Data Center Power Distribution PCIM Panel, Part 1: The Transition to 800 V,” Power Electronics News, Jun. 2026, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //www.powerelectronicsnews.com/the-evolution-in-data-center-power-distribution-pcim-panel-part-1-the-transition-to-800-v/ [89] J. Huber and J. W. Kolar, “Next-Generation Solid-State Transformers for Powering Artificial Intelligence Data Centers: A Survey of Emerg-ing Topologies,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 42–54, Jun. 2026. [90] J. Huntington and M. Tu, “800 VDC Architecture: Industry Alignment & Execution,” NVIDIA White Paper, 2026, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/technologies/800-vdc-architecture/ [91] P. Scalia, “AI Datacenter Grid to Core Power Architecture,” 

Bodo’s Power Systems , pp. 60–61, Mar. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.bodospower.com/restricted/downloads/bp_2026_03.pdf [92] M. Blake, M. Hsu, I. Goldwasser, H. Petty, and J. Huntington, “NVIDIA 800 V HVDC Architecture Will Power the Next Generation of AI Factories,” NVIDIA Technical Blog, May 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/ nvidia-800-v-hvdc-architecture-will-power-the-next-generation-of-ai-factories/ [93] Infineon Technologies, “Data Center Power Solutions,” accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.infineon.com/applications/ai-data-center/data-center-power-solutions [94] Open Compute Project (OCP), “Solid State Transformer (SST) Specification,” Jun. 2026, version 0.3.0, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.opencompute.org/documents/ocp-sst-design-specification-v0-3-final-pdf [95] M. Liserre, G. Buticchi, M. Andresen et al. , “The Smart Transformer: Impact on the Electric Grid and Technology Challenges,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 46–58, Jun. 2016. [96] F. Wald, V. M. Hrishikesan, O. Gomis-Bellmunt et al. , “Applications and Services of Solid-State Transformers in Active Distribution Net-works – A Critical Review,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3615–3637, Sept. 2025. [97] A. Sharida, A. Carreno, A. B. Bayindir et al. , “Multiport Smart Transformers: A Review of Architectures, Applications, and Future Trends,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 15–29, Dec. 2025. [98] I. Khan, S. Rahman, M. A. Ayaz, M. Amir, and H. Shehada, “Review of Isolated DC-DC Converters for Application in Data Center Power Delivery,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 5436–5446, July-Aug. 2024. [99] A. Palanisamy, J. Hassan, R. P. Aguilera et al. , “800 V : 1 VDirect-to-Chip Single-Stage Isolated DC-DC Converter Architecture,” in Proc. 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 - ECCE Asia) , May-Jun. 2026, pp. 1–6. [100] Y. Chen, K. Shi, M. Chen, and D. Xu, “Data Center Power Supply Systems: From Grid Edge to Point-of-Load,” IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron. , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2441–2456, Jun. 2023. [101] S. Mohammadi, W. Wang, M. C. I. Wada et al. , “Grid Integration of AI Data Centers: A Critical Review of Energy Storage Solutions,” 

Adv. Appl. Energy , vol. 23, no. 100291, pp. 1–22, Sept. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S2666792426000302 [102] D. Intal and A. Ebong, “GaN Power Devices and Converter Architectures for AI Data Centers: Efficiency, Reliability, and Deployment Pathways,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25281 , Jun. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.25281 [103] J. Millán, P. Godignon, X. Perpiñà, A. Pérez-Tomás, and J. Rebollo, “A Survey of Wide Bandgap Power Semiconductor Devices,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2155–2163, May 2014. [104] Y. Zhang, D. Dong, Q. Li et al. , “Wide-Bandgap Semiconductors and Power Electronics as Pathways to Carbon Neutrality,” Nat. Rev. Electr. Eng. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 155–172, Mar. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s44287-024-00135-5 [105] R. Ravindran and A. M. Massoud, “An Overview of Wide and Ultra Wide Bandgap Semiconductors for Next-Generation Power Electronics Applications,” Microelectron. Eng. , vol. 299, no. 112348, Sept. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0167931725000371 [106] Y. Qin, B. Albano, J. Spencer et al. , “Thermal Management and Packaging of Wide and Ultra-Wide Bandgap Power Devices: A Review and Perspective,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. , vol. 56, 27 

no. 093001, pp. 093 001:1–23, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6463/acb4ff [107] A. Cherkasov, “Powering AI with SiC: Why Data Centers Are Rethinking Power Supplies,” Infineon Developer Community, Apr. 2026, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //community.infineon.com/t5/Blogs/Powering-AI-with-SiC-Why-data-centers-are-rethinking-power-supplies/ba-p/1206326 [108] W. Hafez, P. Agnihotri, M. Asoro et al. , “Intel PowerVia Technology: Backside Power Delivery for High Density and High-Performance Computing,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology and Circuits (VLSI Technology and Circuits) , Jun. 2023, pp. 1–2. [109] Intel Corporation, “PowerVia Test Shows Industry-Leading Performance,” Business Wire Newsroom, Jun. 2023, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.businesswire.com/news/ home/20230605005191/en/PowerVia- Test- Shows- Industry- Leading-Performance [110] Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), “A16 Technology,” accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //www.tsmc.com/english/dedicatedFoundry/technology/logic/l_A16 [111] A. I. Shaik, “Samsung Could Begin Making Its Most Advanced 2nm Chips Next Year,” SamMobile News, Jul. 2026, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sammobile.com/news/ samsung-begin-making-most-advanced-2nm-chips-2027/ [112] X. Wang, J. Xu, Z. Wang et al. , “An Analytical Study of Power Delivery Systems for Many-Core Processors Using On-Chip and Off-Chip Voltage Regulators,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1401–1414, Sept. 2015. [113] P. R. Prakash, A. Nabih, Y. Liang et al. , “High Current, High Power-Density Intermediate Bus Converters for Vertical Power Delivery to Next-Generation Processors,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 14 771–14 784, Oct. 2025. [114] Y. Zhu, N. M. Ellis, S. S. Kudva et al. , “A Switching Bus Converter En-abling Direct 48-V-to-Point-of-Load Vertical Power Delivery for High-Performance Data Center Processors,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 11 098–11 119, Jul. 2026. [115] A. M. Naradhipa and Q. Li, “Multiphase Lateral Flux Indirect Coupled Inductor for Vertical Power Delivery Voltage Regulator Module,” in 

Proc. 2025 IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) , Mar. 2025, pp. 498–504. [116] G. Deboy and F. Björk, “The Future of Powering AI: Redefining the Power Flow in and beyond AI Data Centers,” Infineon Whitepaper, Oct. 2025, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.infineon.com/assets/row/public/documents/24/59/infineon-powering-the-future-of-ai-whitepaper-en.pdf [117] C. Nan, H. Gan, R. Chen, Q. Wang, and X. Li, “Integrating Trans-Inductor Voltage Regulator (TLVR) in Vertical Power Delivery,” U.S. Patent 12,159,738 B2, Dec. 2024, assigned to Google LLC, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://patents.google.com/ patent/US12159738B2/en [118] Infineon Technologies, “Infineon Unveils Next Generation of High-Density Power Modules for Vertical Power Delivery (VPD) in AI Data Centers,” Mar. 2025, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.infineon.com/technology-news/2025/infpss202503-073 [119] Z. Wen and D. Xu, “A Planar Transformer Integration Design With 2D Scalability for Vertical Power Delivery to HPC Processors,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 11 020–11 030, Jul. 2026. [120] M. Choi, S. Krishnakumar, R. Rahimzadeh Khorasani et al. , “Substrate-Embedded Microfluidic Cooling of Distributed Vertical Power Delivery Architectures for High-Performance Computing Processors,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Manuf. Technol. , vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1912– 1920, Sept. 2025. [121] J. Parker, “Hotter Than a Hot Tub: The 45°C Breakthrough to Cool AI’s Biggest Machines,” NVIDIA Blog, Jun. 2026, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/liquid-cooling-ai-factories/ [122] Z. Yan, G. Liu, J. M. Khan, and A. A. Balandin, “Graphene Quilts for Thermal Management of High-Power GaN Transistors,” Nat. Commun. , vol. 3, no. 827, pp. 1–8, May 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms1828 [123] X. Qian, J. Zhou, and G. Chen, “Phonon-Engineered Extreme Thermal Conductivity Materials,” Nat. Mater. , vol. 20, pp. 1188–1202, Sept. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41563-021-00918-3 [124] Z. Dou, C. Lei, K. Wu, and G. Yu, “The Development of Thermal Interface Materials,” Nat. Electron. , vol. 8, pp. 1146–1155, Dec. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41928-025-01543-7 [125] K. Wu, Z. Dou, S. Deng et al. , “Mechanochemistry-Mediated Colloidal Liquid Metals for Electronic Device Cooling at Kilowatt Levels,” Nat. Nanotechnol. , vol. 20, pp. 104–111, Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41565-024-01793-0 [126] R. van Erp, R. Soleimanzadeh, L. Nela, G. Kampitsis, and E. Matioli, “Co-Designing Electronics with Microfluidics for More Sustainable Cooling,” Nature , vol. 585, pp. 211–216, Sept. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2666-1 [127] S. Kochupurackal Rajan, B. Ramakrishnan, H. Alissa et al. , “Integrated Silicon Microfluidic Cooling of a High-Power Overclocked CPU for Efficient Thermal Management,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 59 259– 59 269, May 2022. [128] B. Li and B.-Y. Cao, “Advancing Cooling Limits with 3D Embedded Microchannels,” Nat. Electron. , vol. 8, pp. 762–763, Sept. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41928-025-01455-6 [129] Z. Wu, W. Xiao, H. He, W. Wang, and B. Song, “Jet-Enhanced Manifold Microchannels for Cooling Electronics up to a Heat Flux of 3,000 W cm −2,” Nat. Electron. , vol. 8, pp. 810–817, Sept. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41928-025-01449-4 [130] G. Sahu, R. Li, K. Yogi, A. H. Patel, and T. Wei, “Experimental Investigation of a Compact Lid-Compatible Multijet Impingement Manifold for Direct-On-Chip Cooling,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Manuf. Technol. , vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 748–756, Nov. 2025. [131] C. Bolgar, “AI Chips Are Getting Hotter: A Microfluidics Breakthrough Goes Straight to the Silicon to Cool up to Three Times Better,” Microsoft Source, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //news.microsoft.com/source/features/innovation/microfluidics-liquid-cooling-ai-chips/ [132] H. Alissa, T. Nick, A. Raniwala et al. , “Using Life Cycle Assessment to Drive Innovation for Sustainable Cool Clouds,” 

Nature , vol. 641, pp. 331–338, May 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-08832-3 [133] M. Baynes, “Accelerated Compute and the Heat Reuse Opportunity: Turning Waste Energy into a Net Zero Advantage,” Schneider Electric, Jun. 2026, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://blog.se. com/datacenter/2026/06/19/accelerated-compute-and-the-heat-reuse-opportunity-turning-waste-energy-into-a-net-zero-advantage/ [134] X. Yuan, J. Liu, S. Sun et al. , “Data Center Waste Heat for District Heating Networks: A Review,” Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. , vol. 219, pp. 115 863:1–15, Sept.. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032125005362 [135] Y. Numata, L. Speelman, L. Shwisberg, C. Gulli, and A. Gorin, “Fast, Flexible Solutions for Data Centers,” RMI, Jul. 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://rmi.org/resources/fast-flexible-solutions-for-data-centers/ [136] J. Sun, S. Wang, J. Wang, and L. M. Tolbert, “Dynamic Model and Converter-Based Emulator of a Data Center Power Distribution System,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 8420–8432, Jul. 2022. [137] X. Zhao and J. Zhao, “Dynamic Modeling of Data-Center Power Delivery for Power System Resonance Analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06624 , Apr. 2026. [138] C. Mishra, L. Vanfretti, J. Delaree, Jr., T. J. Purcell, and K. D. Jones, “Understanding the Inception of 14.7 Hz Oscillations Emerging from a Data Center,” Sustain. Energy Grids Netw. , vol. 43, p. 101735, Sep. 2025. [139] L. Fan, A. Yazdanpanah, Y. Cheng et al. , “Replicating Real-World 23-Hz Oscillations Caused by Large Electronic Loads,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17190 , May 2026. [140] J. Sun, M. Xu, M. Cespedes, and M. Kauffman, “Data Center Power System Stability–Part I: Power Supply Impedance Modeling,” CSEE J. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 403–419, Mar. 2022. [141] North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), “Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads,” North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Large Loads Task Force White Paper, Jul. 2025, accessed: August, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc.com/globalassets/who-we-are/standing-committees/ rstc/3_doc_white-paper-characteristics-and-risks-of-emerging- large-loads.pdf [142] NERC, “Incident Review: Considering Simultaneous Voltage-Sensitive Load Reductions,” North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Jan. 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www. nerc.com/globalassets/our-work/reports/event-reports/incident_review_ large_load_loss.pdf 28 

[143] B. A. Ross and J. Follum, “Electromagnetic Transient Modeling of Large Data Centers for Grid-Level Studies: Alpha Release,” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Dec. 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.pnnl.gov/main/publications/external/ technical_reports/PNNL-38817.pdf [144] M.-S. Ko and H. Zhu, “Wide-Area Power System Oscillations from Large-Scale AI Workloads,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 3908–3921, Sept. 2026. [145] Y. Li and Y. Li, “AI load dynamics–a power electronics perspective,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01647 , Feb. 2025. [146] P. P. Gyang, P. Chakraborty, L. G. Meegahapola, and X. Yu, “Dynamic Modeling of a Data Center for Power System Stability Studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 2317–2329, May 2026. [147] Q. Lin, R. Burgos, D. Dong et al. , “Architecture Analysis and Stability Evaluation of High-Voltage DC-Powered Server Racks,” in Proc. IEEE Energy Convers. Congr. Expo. (ECCE) , Oct. 2024, pp. 1053–1058. [148] P. P. Gyang, P. Chakraborty, L. G. Meegahapola, and X. Yu, “Grid Integrated Data Centers: Architectures, Modeling, Interconnection Re-quirements, Challenges, and Opportunities,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Elec-tron. Soc. , vol. 7, pp. 1080–1112, Jun. 2026. [149] J. Sun, M. Mihret, M. Cespedes, D. Wong, and M. Kauffman, “Data Center Power System Stability–Part II: System Modeling and Analy-sis,” CSEE J. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 420–438, Mar. 2022. [150] A. Jiménez-Ruiz and F. Milano, “Data Center Model for Transient Sta-bility Analysis of Power Systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16575 ,May 2025. [151] A. Kwasinski and C. N. Onwuchekwa, “Dynamic Behavior and Stabi-lization of DC Microgrids With Instantaneous Constant-Power Loads,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 822–834, Mar. 2011. [152] X. Zhao, L. Zhu, L. Guo et al. , “Control Parameters Design Procedure for Multi-Converters DC Power System Considering Dynamic Interac-tion Between Converters,” CSEE J. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 724–738, Mar. 2025. [153] Y. Gui, R. Han, J. M. Guerrero et al. , “Large-Signal Stability Improve-ment of DC–DC Converters in DC Microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. , vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 2534–2544, Sep. 2021. [154] G. Valverde, G. Pierrou, J. Krajacic, and G. Hug, “Forced Oscillations in Power Systems Induced by AI Workloads in Data Centers,” TechRxiv preprint , Oct. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.techrxiv.org/doi/10.36227/techrxiv.176127304.46362185 [155] T. Zhu, X. Wang, F. Zhao, and G. V. Torrico-Bascopé, “Impedance-Based Aggregation of Paralleled Power Factor Correction Converters in Data Centers,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 5254–5265, Apr. 2023. [156] L. Zhu, X. Zhao, X. Li et al. , “Advanced System-Level Model Reduction Method for Multi-Converter DC Power Systems,” CSEE J. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1550–1562, Jul. 2024. [157] J. D. Vasquez-Plaza, Y. Gui, J. Dong, and J. Lian, “Stability En-hancement of Centralized UPS Data Center Systems Under Weak-Grid Conditions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.21536 , Jun. 2026. [158] M. H. Arifin, S. F. Khan, S. Kamalasadan et al. , “Dynamic Modeling of Large Data Centers Integrated Electric Grid With Impact Analysis and Oscillatory Behavior Assessment,” in Proc. IEEE Rural Electr. Power Conf. (REPC) , 2026, pp. 1–6. [159] B. A. Ross, X. Lyu, U. C. Nwaneto, S. M. Mohiuddin, and A. B. Nassif, “Using Grid-Forming Energy Storage Systems to Provide Dynamic Active Power Support for Hyperscale Data Center,” IEEE Access ,vol. 14, pp. 29 250–29 259, Feb. 2026. [160] J. Weber, “Power Electronic Reconnecting and Ceasing Load Model,” PowerWorld Corporation, NERC Load Modeling Task Force Webinar, Nov. 2025, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.powerworld.com/files/Power- Electronic- Reconnecting-and-Ceasing-PERC1-Load-Model.pdf [161] J. Sun, “Small-Signal Methods for AC Distributed Power Systems—A Review,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2545–2554, Nov. 2009. [162] H. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Wu, and Z. Li, “Input Impedance Modeling and Verification of Single-Phase Voltage Source Converters Based on Harmonic Linearization,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8544–8554, Sep. 2019. [163] S. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Tian et al. , “Understanding a Type of Forced Oscillation in Grid-Forming and Grid-Following Inverter Connected Systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 11 628– 11 640, Aug. 2025. [164] M. U. Afzaal, Y. Liu, Y. Yang et al. , “EMT-based analysis of suprahar-monic emission and propagation in IBRs and data centers dominated power systems,” in Proc. 2025 New Jersey Future Energy Transmission Conf. (NJFET) , Dec. 2025. [165] S. Viththarachchige, D. Alexander, S. Rajendran, A. Manoharan, and V. Aravinthan, “Concerns and Redefining Load Modeling of Large Data Centers in Future Power Systems—A Review,” in Proc. IEEE Green Technol. Conf. (GreenTech) , 2026. [166] S. Anand and B. G. Fernandes, “Reduced-Order Model and Stability Analysis of Low-Voltage DC Microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. ,vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 5040–5049, Nov. 2013. [167] X. Meng, D. Xie, H. Lin et al. , “Dissipativity-Based Multiport Stability Root-Cause Identification and Mitigation for Solid-State Transformers,” 

IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9850–9862, Jul. 2026. [168] P. Xu, H. Wen, Q. Bu et al. , “Large-Signal Stability for DAB Converters Feeding Constant Power Load Based on State Trajectory Analysis,” 

IEEE Trans. Transport. Electrific. , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 3244–3261, Feb. 2025. [169] L. Herrera, W. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Stability Analysis and Controller Design of DC Microgrids With Constant Power Loads,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 881–888, Mar. 2017. [170] R. Kong, S. Sahoo, Y. Song et al. , “Multiresolution dynamic mode decomposition for wideband harmonic instability identification,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 5037–5051, 2025. [171] A. M. Rahimi and A. Emadi, “Active Damping in DC/DC Power Electronic Converters: A Novel Method to Overcome the Problems of Constant Power Loads,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1428–1439, May 2009. [172] X. Zhang, X. Ruan, and Q.-C. Zhong, “Improving the Stability of Cascaded DC/DC Converter Systems via Shaping the Input Impedance of the Load Converter With a Parallel or Series Virtual Impedance,” 

IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 7499–7512, Dec. 2015. [173] X. Lu, K. Sun, J. M. Guerrero et al. , “Stability Enhancement Based on Virtual Impedance for DC Microgrids With Constant Power Loads,” 

IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 2770–2783, Nov. 2015. [174] L. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Li et al. , “Stability Analysis and Damping Enhancement Based on Frequency-Dependent Virtual Impedance for DC Microgrids,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Power Electron. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 338–349, Mar. 2017. [175] X. Su, M. Wang, B. Zhao et al. , “An Adaptive Compensated Virtual Impedance Method for Oscillation Suppression in DC Distribution Power Systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 4854– 4864, May 2025. [176] Y. Fan, T. Wang, B. Zhao, Y. Wang, and X. Su, “An Adaptive Oscillation Suppression Strategy Based on SOGI-FLL for Cascaded DC Systems,” in Proc. IEEE Energy Convers. Congr. Expo. (ECCE) ,Oct. 2025, pp. 1–7. [177] X. Su, Y. Wang, M. Wang et al. , “Dynamic-Loss-Free Stability Enhancement for DC Data Center Power Systems With Impedance-Reshaped Flying Capacitor,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 13 330–13 343, Aug. 2026. [178] X. Su, M. Wang, Y. Liu et al. , “A Virtual-Capacitor-Based Inertia Enhancement Method for Switching Converters in DC Microgrids,” 

IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 1481–1486, Jan. 2026. [179] Q. Xu, C. Zhang, C. Wen, and P. Wang, “A Novel Composite Nonlinear Controller for Stabilization of Constant Power Load in DC Microgrid,” 

IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 752–761, Jan. 2019. [180] T. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Pen, and Z. Wang, “Data Center Holistic Demand Response Algorithm to Smooth Microgrid Tie-Line Power Fluctuation,” Appl. Energy , vol. 231, pp. 277–287, 2018. [181] J. Matevosyan, B. Badrzadeh, E. Meier et al. , “Integration of Large Power Electronics-Interfaced Loads in Power Systems: Challenges and Opportunities–Part I: Technical Foundations,” CIGRE Science & Engineering, CSE No. 41, Jun. 2026, accessed: July, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://cse.cigre.org/cse-n041/integration-of-large-power-electronics-interfaced-loads-in-power-systems-challenges-and-opportunities-part-i-technical-foundations.html [182] M. Shamseldein, “Mitigating Grid Stability Risks From Large AI Data Centres: A Three-Mode Supervisory Control Framework for Centralized UPS Systems,” IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. , vol. 20, p. e70369, 2026. [183] M.-A. Nasr and A. Hooshyar, “Controlling Grid-Forming Inverters to Meet the Negative-Sequence Current Requirements of the IEEE Standard 2800-2022,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 2541–2555, Aug. 2023. [184] I. Alaperä, J. Paananen, K. Dalen, K. Hornnes, and S. Honkapuro, “Fast Frequency Response from a UPS System of a Data Center, Background, and Pilot Results,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Eur. Energy Market (EEM) ,Sep. 2019, pp. 1–5. 29 

[185] Google Data Centers, “Power Usage Effectiveness,” accessed: Sept., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://datacenters.google/efficiency/ [186] E. Masanet, A. Shehabi, N. Lei, S. Smith, and J. Koomey, “Recali-brating global data center energy-use estimates,” Science , vol. 367, no. 6481, pp. 984–986, 2020. [187] OpenAI, “Building AI infrastructure with the Effingham County community,” Jul. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/building- ai- infrastructure- with-the-effingham-county-community/ [188] R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut et al ,“Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal Models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805 [189] J. Hsu, “How Much Power Will Quantum Computing Need?” IEEE Spectrum, Oct. 2015, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //spectrum.ieee.org/how-much-power-will-quantum-computing-need [190] S. Chen, “Are Quantum Computers Really Energy Efficient?” Nat. Comput. Sci. , vol. 3, pp. 457–460, Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s43588-023-00459-6 [191] E. Desdentado, C. Calero, M. Á. Moraga, M. A. Serrano, and F. García, “Exploring the Trade-Off between Computational Power and Energy Efficiency: An Analysis of the Evolution of Quantum Computing and Its Relation to Classical Computing,” J. Syst. Software , vol. 217, no. 112165, pp. 112 165:1–14, Nov. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121224002103 [192] K. H. Teo, Y. Zhang, N. Chowdhury et al. , “Emerging GaN Technolo-gies for Power, RF, Digital, and Quantum Computing Applications: Recent Advances and Prospects,” J. Appl. Phys. , vol. 130, no. 160902, Oct. 2021. [193] ITEST, “Quantum Computing Power Supplies,” accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.itest.fr/quantum-and-nano-physics/ [194] S. Morovati, S. Chuangpishit, and A. Zamani, “Leveraging Virtual Power Plants to Enhance Reliability and Sustainability in AI-Driven Data Centers,” CIGRE Science & Engineering, CSE No. 39, Dec. 2025, accessed: August, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //cse.cigre.org/cse-n039/leveraging-virtual-power-plants-to-enhance-reliability-and-sustainability-in-ai-driven-data-centers.html [195] C. Crozier and M. Liska, “The Potential of Data Center Energy Demand To Provide Grid Flexibility,” Curr. Sustain. Renew. Energy Rep. , vol. 12, p. 12, Apr. 2025. [196] H. Mu, Z. Zeng, D. Yang, Y. Sun, and X. Wang, “Self-Measurement of Three-Phase Converter Impedance With Virtual Excitation Source,” 

IEEE Open J. Power Electron. , vol. 6, pp. 919–930, 2025. [197] G. Marini, N. E. Lima Baschera, A. Lidozzi, M. Di Benedetto, and L. Solero, “Multi-SIN-Based Real-Time Impedance Estimation for Self-Commissioning Controller and Active Damping in an LCL-Grid-Tied VSI,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Appl. , vol. 6, pp. 785–798, 2025. [198] S. Schwarz, S. Sahoo, M. Stoffers et al. , “Resilient Low-Inertia Power Systems through Asynchronous Energy Balancing,” Nat. Rev. Electr. Eng. , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 101–110, Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s44287-025-00256-5 [199] NERC, “Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads,” North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Mar. 2026, accessed: August, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc.com/globalassets/our-work/guidelines/reliability/white-paper---assessment-of-gaps.pdf [200] AESO, “Guide to AESO Connection Requirements for Transmission-Connected Data Centres,” Jun. 2026, accessed: July 29th, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.aeso.ca/assets/Uploads/grid/Guide-to-AESO-Connection-Requirements-for-Transmission-Connected-Data-Centres.pdf [201] EPRI, “Power Quality Monitoring: Concepts, Equipment, and Applications Concepts, Equipment, and Application,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://restservice.epri.com/ publicdownload/000000000001018668/0/Product [202] EirGrid, “Fault Ride Through / Active Power Recovery /Rate of Change of Frequency: EirGrid Update Including Assessment of System Service / Grid Solution Alternatives,” Jun. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //cms.eirgrid.ie/sites/default/files/publications/MPID345_FRT_Update_ %26_Alternative_Solutions_Assessment_Information_Paper.pdf [203] D. B. Rawat, R. Doku, and M. Garuba, “Cybersecurity in Big Data Era: From Securing Big Data to Data-Driven Security,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. , vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 2055–2072, Nov.-Dec. 2021. [204] L. Caviglione, M. Gaggero, E. Cambiaso, and M. Aiello, “Measuring the Energy Consumption of Cyber Security,” IEEE Commun. Mag. ,vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 58–63, Jul. 2017. [205] S. Sahoo, T. Dragicevic, and F. Blaabjerg, “Cyber Security in Control of Grid-Tied Power Electronic Converters—Challenges and Vulnera-bilities,” IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron. , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 5326–5340, Oct. 2021. [206] R. Liu, C. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, T. T. Gamage, and A. K. Srivastava, “Analyzing the Cyber-Physical Impact of Cyber Events on the Power Grid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2444–2453, Sep. 2015. [207] X. Huang, Z. Qin, and H. Liu, “A Survey on Power Grid Cyber Security: From Component-Wise Vulnerability Assessment to System-Wide Impact Analysis,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 69 023–69 035, Dec. 2018. [208] S. Sahoo, Y. Yang, and F. Blaabjerg, “Resilient Synchronization Strat-egy for AC Microgrids Under Cyber Attacks,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 73–77, Jan. 2021. [209] A. Dabrowski, J. Ullrich, and E. R. Weippl, “Grid Shock: Coordinated Load-Changing Attacks on Power Grids: The Non-Smart Power Grid Is Vulnerable to Cyber Attacks as Well,” in Proc. 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference . Association for Computing Machinery, Dec. 2017, pp. 303–314. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3134600.3134639 [210] S. Lakshminarayana, Y. Chen, C. Maple et al. , “Cybersecurity Threats to Power Grid Operations From the Demand-Side Response Ecosystem: A Comprehensive Overview,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 62–72, Jun. 2025. [211] X. He, R. Wang, J. Wu, and W. Li, “Nature of Power Electronics and Integration of Power Conversion with Communication for Talkative Power,” Nat. Commun. , vol. 11, no. 2479, pp. 1–12, May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-16262-0 [212] M. Liserre, H. Beiranvand, Y. Leng, R. Zhu, and P. A. Hoeher, “Overview of Talkative Power Conversion Technologies,” IEEE Open J. Power Electron. , vol. 4, pp. 67–80, Jan. 2023. [213] S. Sahoo, “Spike Talk: Genesis and Neural Coding Scheme Transla-tions,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 2659–2670, May 2025. [214] G. López, J. Matanza, D. De La Vega et al. , “The Role of Power Line Communications in the Smart Grid Revisited: Applications, Chal-lenges, and Research Initiatives,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 117 346– 117 368, Jul. 2019. [215] Texas Instruments, “AFE031: 1500 mA Integrated Power-Line Communications (PLC) Analog Front End for Driving Low-Impedance Lines,” Texas Instruments Product Page, Jun. 2019, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ti.com/product/AFE031 [216] L. Carneiro de Souza, V. Dala Pegorara Souto, and A. Cerqueira Sodré, “Radio- and Power-Over-Fiber Integration for 6G Networks: Chal-lenges and Future Prospects,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 5321–5341, Dec. 2024. [217] M. A. Arroyave, B. Behera, F. Cavanna et al. , “Characterization and Novel Application of Power Over Fiber for Electronics in a Harsh Environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16816 , pp. 1–29, May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16816 [218] European Health and Digital Executive Agency, “Photonics Research Projects Addressing the Energy and Scalability Need of Future Data Centres,” European Health and Digital Executive Agency (HaDEA) News, Nov. 2025, accessed: Aug., 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //hadea.ec.europa.eu/news/photonics- research- projects- addressing-energy-and-scalability-need-future-data-centres-2025-11-26_en [219] L. Torrijos-Morán and D. Pérez-López, “Industry Insight: Photonics to Scale AI Data Centers,” npj Nanophotonics , vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 1–4, Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/ s44310-025-00105-1 [220] M. Yan, C. Huang, P. Bienstman et al. , “Emerging Opportunities and Challenges for the Future of Reservoir Computing,” Nat. Commun. ,vol. 15, no. 2056, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-45187-1 [221] L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, M. M. Stein et al. , “Deep Physical Neural Networks Trained with Backpropagation,” Nature , vol. 601, no. 7894, pp. 549–555, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-04223-6 [222] A. Momeni, B. Rahmani, B. Scellier et al. , “Training of Physical Neural Networks,” Nature , vol. 645, no. 8079, pp. 53–61, Sept. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09384-2 [223] Y. Song and S. Sahoo, “Unlocking Innate Computing Abilities in Electric Grids,” Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. , vol. 7, no. 103494, pp. 1–8, Sept. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.cell.com/cell-reports-physical-science/fulltext/S2666-3864(26)00400-5 30 

[224] N. Z. Muller, “Measuring the Impact of Data Centers in the United States Economy: Monetary Damage from Air Pollution and Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Apr. 2026, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/ w35100/w35100.pdf [225] Climate Neutral Data Center Pact, “The Green Deal needs Green Infrastructure,” accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.climateneutraldatacentre.net/ [226] A. Radovanovi´ c, R. Koningstein, I. Schneider et al. , “Carbon-aware Computing for Datacenters,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1270–1280, 2022. [227] S. Hall, F. Micheli, G. Belgioioso, A. Radovanovi´ c, and F. Dörfler, “Carbon-aware Computing for Data Centers with Probabilistic Perfor-mance Guarantees,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , pp. 1–14, Nov. 2025. [228] A. P. Oliveira, C. Tânia, and C. Martinez-Perez, “Beyond Efficiency: A Systematic Review of Energy Consumption and Carbon Footprint Across the AI Lifecycle,” Sustainability , vol. 18, no. 3, p. 1359, 2026. [229] J. Han, E. Du, B. Du et al. , “Carbon-Aware Spatial-Temporal Schedul-ing for Multiple AI Data Center Parks with Training and Inference Workloads Characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , pp. 1–14, Mar. 2026. [230] Electricity Maps, “Electricity Maps Emission Factors Methodology,” Mar. 2024, accessed: Sept. 1st, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://xgjzloifyvgpbmyonaya.supabase.co/storage/v1/object/public/ files/8X78fBeCXk/original [231] M. A. Islam, H. Mahmud, S. Ren, and X. Wang, “A Carbon-Aware Incentive Mechanism for Greening Colocation Data Centers,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 4–16, 2020.