Title: Hardware-Aware Learned Representation Compression for Distributed In-Sensor Vision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.13947v1

Published Time: Tue, 15 Sep 2026 00:53:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 1

# Hardware-Aware Learned Representation Compression for Distributed In-Sensor Vision 

Chengwei Zhou, Abu Masum ID , Graduate Member, IEEE , Xuming Chen, Mehran Moghadam ID , Graduate Member, IEEE , Sreetama Sarkar, Arnab Sanyal ID , Graduate Member, IEEE , Md Abdullah-Al Kaiser, M. Hassan Najafi ID , Senior Member, IEEE , Sercan Aygun ID , Senior Member, IEEE , and Gourav Datta ID ,

Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —In-sensor computing reduces the cost of transmitting high-resolution image data by performing early-stage processing near the sensor. However, the logic chip integrated with aCMOS image sensor (CIS) is tightly constrained in compute and memory, limiting conventional deep neural network partitioning. We present OASIS, a distributed in-sensor vision framework that uses a lightweight encoder to generate compact, task-relevant representations before off-chip transmission. The encoder is trained end-to-end using task, entropy, and reconstruction ob-jectives, while the decoder is used only during training. OASIS supports two complementary deployment paths. The first applies 4-bit quantization and Huffman coding while preserving the spatial structure required by classification and dense-prediction tasks. The second uses Sobol-based hyperdimensional computing (HDC) to transform the encoder latent into a fixed-dimensional binary hypervector for associative-memory classification. For the SwinViT-based VWW model, mapping a 3 × 3 × 8 latent to a 64-dimensional hypervector provides an additional 1.77 ×

communication reduction with less than one percentage point of accuracy loss relative to the 128-dimensional configuration, yielding an overall 18 ,816 × reduction compared with raw 8-bit image transmission. We implement the digital near-sensor pipeline on an AMD Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ FPGA and characterize it using direct board-level power measurements and Vivado post-implementation analysis, together with circuit-simulated CIS models and a 7-nm ASIC projection. Across visual wake-word classification, hand tracking, and eye tracking, OASIS reduces total system energy by approximately 2×–4.5× while maintaining competitive accuracy, demonstrating a practical hardware–algorithm co-design path for communication-efficient in-sensor vision. 

Index Terms —in-sensor, encoder, CNN, ViT, AR/VR. 

I. I NTRODUCTION Chengwei Zhou, Xuming Chen, Mehran Moghadam, M. Hassan Najafi, and Gourav Datta are with the Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engi-neering (ECSE) Department, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA (e-mail: chengwei.zhou@case.edu; xuming.chen@case.edu; moghadam@case.edu; najafi@case.edu; gourav.datta@case.edu). Abu Masum and Sercan Aygun are with the School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA 70503, USA (e-mail: c00591145@louisiana.edu; sercan.aygun@louisiana.edu). Sreetama Sarkar is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engin-nering (ECE), University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA (e-mail: sreetama@usc.edu). Arnab Sanyal is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-ing, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA (e-mail: sanyal@utexas.edu). Md Abdullah-Al Kaiser is currently with Apple; this work was completed while he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA (e-mail: mkaiser8@wisc.edu). An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2026 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI) 2026 [1]. 

# THe rapid deployment of computer vision in applica-tions including surveillance, autonomous systems, dis-aster response, and mobile devices has increased both the amount of visual data being captured and the computational demand placed on the corresponding inference pipelines. A conventional imaging system physically separates these two functions: a CMOS image sensor (CIS) first converts incident light into digital pixel values [2], after which the resulting image is transferred to a CPU, GPU, or dedicated acceler-ator for processing. For high-resolution and high-frame-rate operation, moving this pixel stream can impose substantial communication, throughput, and energy costs before any task-relevant information is extracted. A range of architectures has therefore attempted to move computation closer to image acquisition. Near-sensor systems place an accelerator adjacent to the sensor, either on the same platform or through heterogeneous integration [3], [4]; in-sensor systems move processing into the CIS periphery itself [5], [6]; and in-pixel architectures perform selected computations directly within or immediately adjacent to the pixel array [7]–[9]. These approaches reduce the physical distance between sensing and computation, but several chal-lenges remain. Most prior demonstrations operate on relatively simple datasets such as MNIST or low-resolution CIFAR-10, or implement only a small number of early neural-network op-erations. Supporting deeper multi-channel and multi-bit com-putations under the area, memory, and power constraints of the sensor remains substantially more difficult. Consequently, the activation tensor leaving the sensor can still be large, limiting communication savings and leaving a considerable fraction of the end-to-end computation on the external processor. We consider a heterogeneous architecture in which the CIS is coupled to a dedicated logic chip, following the general integration direction explored in prior sensor–compute systems [10], [11]. Micro through-silicon vias ( μTSVs) provide a high-bandwidth, low-energy connection between the sensor and this logic layer, allowing more processing to be performed before information reaches the comparatively expensive ex-ternal interface. The central design problem is therefore not simply how many layers of an existing DNN can be moved onto the logic die. Instead, the sensor-side network should be explicitly designed to produce a representation whose spatial and channel dimensions are small enough to substantially reduce communication, while its computation and storage requirements remain compatible with the resource envelope of arXiv:2609.13947v1 [cs.LG] 12 Sep 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 2

the integrated logic chip. This observation motivates OASIS, which treats sensor-side processing as a learned representation-compression problem. Rather than requiring the near-sensor encoder to independently solve the target application, we optimize it to generate a compact latent representation from which an off-chip model can recover the information necessary for the downstream task. This separation allows the sensor-side encoder to focus on aggressive dimensionality reduction while the more application-specific processing remains outside the sensor. The resulting architecture is particularly useful when the energy saved by reducing external communication and back-end processing exceeds the additional cost of computing the compact representation locally. The encoder is trained jointly with a reconstruction branch and a task-specific branch. Three complementary objectives shape the latent space: the downstream task objective encour-ages preservation of discriminative information; an entropy objective favors statistical distributions that can be represented efficiently after quantization; and an image-reconstruction ob-jective discourages the encoder from discarding information that remains useful for describing the input. The reconstruction decoder is required only during optimization and is removed during inference, so its computational cost does not appear in the deployed sensor-side pipeline. In contrast to conventional image compression such as JPEG [12], which is primarily designed around perceptual fidelity for human viewing, the learned OASIS representation is optimized around the require-ments of machine inference. This also differs from approaches that directly execute inference on a conventionally compressed representation [13]: here, the compression front end itself is learned jointly with the target model. Our proposed architecture provides two ways to export this learned representation. The general path retains the spa-tial organization of the encoder output and combines low-bit quantization with Huffman coding, allowing the repre-sentation to support both classification and dense-prediction applications. For classification workloads, we additionally in-troduce an HDC path in which the encoder latent is converted into a single fixed-dimensional hypervector before it crosses the sensor-to-host interface. The latter removes the need to transmit a decodable spatial feature map and replaces the conventional task-specific classifier with associative-memory inference, providing a distinct operating point in the accuracy– communication–hardware trade space. Hardware evaluation is also essential because an arithmetic-operation count alone does not capture many costs that arise in an implemented sensor-side accelerator. Buffer organization, control logic, pipeline behavior, memory accesses, and interconnect activity can materially affect the energy consumed by the digital pipeline. We therefore implement the encoder and its post-processing datapath on an AMD Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ platform and combine the resulting FPGA characterization with circuit-level simulation of the CIS front end. We further use the realized FPGA design as the basis for a 7-nm ASIC energy projection representative of a future co-packaged logic die. This hardware-backed methodology provides a more concrete system-level evaluation than estimates based solely on per-MAC energy and operation counts. Across visual wake-word classification, hand tracking, and eye tracking, the structured quantization-and-Huffman path reduces the transmitted bit volume by as much as 11 ,985 ×

relative to raw 8-bit image transmission. The HDC classi-fication path provides an even more compressed operating point: for the SwinViT-based VWW configuration, mapping a 

3 × 3 × 8 latent tensor to a 64 -dimensional binary hypervector yields an overall 18 ,816 × reduction relative to the raw image. At the system level, OASIS reduces the modeled energy by approximately 2×–4.5× while maintaining competitive downstream-task performance. II. B ACKGROUND & R ELATED WORKS 

A. In- & Near-Sensor Computing 

Efforts to close the gap between image acquisition and computation fall along a spectrum defined by how deeply processing is pushed toward the photodiode. Near-sensor 

designs place an accelerator adjacent to the sensor, either on the same board or 3D-stacked with the CIS, reducing but not eliminating the cost of moving raw pixels off the array. In-sensor designs embed compute in the CIS periphery, while 

in-pixel designs perform computation inside the pixel itself. The present work is best understood against the accuracy, efficiency, and generality limits that prior points on this spectrum have encountered, summarized in Table II. A recurring constraint is task and resolution scale . Several influential in-pixel and in-sensor accelerators demonstrate their concepts on MNIST or low-resolution CIFAR-10 with shallow networks: SCAMP [8] embeds compact CNNs on a pixel-processor array, MR-PIPA [14] integrates multilevel RRAM for in-pixel CNN execution, Senputing [15] fuses sensing and computing for always-on inference with a two-layer MLP, and DPCE [16] and PiPSim [17] target LeNet-class networks via direct-photocurrent computation and behavioral PIP modeling, respectively. While these works report strong per-operation ef-ficiency, their evaluations do not extend to the high-resolution, multi-channel workloads representative of practical machine vision, and their shallow architectures limit the achievable activation compression. A second constraint is the compute domain and reconfigura-bility . Many high-efficiency designs rely on analog or mixed-signal in-pixel computation and emerging non-volatile devices, which constrains them to fixed early-stage operations (often a single convolution) and limits reprogrammability across tasks. P 2M [7] exemplifies the processing-in-pixel-in-memory paradigm at VWW-scale resolution ( 224 2), but, like other analog approaches, performs only the first convolutional block in-pixel; the bulk of the network, and therefore the dominant share of system energy under Amdahl’s law, still executes off-sensor, and the analog datapath offers limited flexibility across workloads. A third, and frequently overlooked, constraint is evaluation methodology . The efficiency figures reported by many in-/near-sensor systems derive from analytical per-MAC energy esti-mates that omit control logic, memory banking, pipeline stalls, and interconnect overhead, making cross-design comparison difficult and optimistic. Distributed sensor-logic frameworks IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 3

such as [10] improve realism with semi-analytical power models but still adopt conventional backbones that do not aggressively compress spatial and channel dimensions. 

B. Hyperdimensional Computing Engine 

Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) has emerged as a compelling brain-inspired alternative computational paradigm, offering lightweight, energy-efficient data processing capabil-ities [18]. Leveraging high-dimensional vector spaces, HDC has demonstrated exceptional efficacy across diverse domains, including healthcare [19], IoT sensors [20], [21], privacy and fault-tolerance applications [22], [23], cognitive model-ing [24], and few-shot learning [25]. Because it facilitates rapid, single-pass training and maps natively to low-power hardware, this framework is uniquely suited for real-time applications deployed on resource-constrained edge systems. The beating heart of an HDC system encompasses the quasi-orthogonal high dimensional hypervectors (HVs) , the atomic data structure in this paradigm, providing the capacity to represent scalar and complex symbolic information. Unlike conventional scalar architectures, HDC map disparate data modalities (e.g., spatial coordinates, alphanumeric characters, and temporal timestamps) into a unified and holistic, high-dimensional binary (logic-‘0’ and logic-‘1’) or bipolar ( ±1) vector format. This distributed representation provides intrinsic fault tolerance; as the information is stochastically distributed across high dimensions, exhibiting robust resilience against hardware noise and bit-flip errors. HVs are generated by comparing random source values with positional indicators or with scalar values over D

cycles. The encoding process then applies a sequence of lightweight logical operations, including permutation , binding ,and bundling . Permutation reorders vector elements to pre-serve orthogonality, binding combines multiple HVs through element-wise multiplication of bipolar values ( ±1)–or XOR 

in the binary computing case–and bundling merges multiple HVs into a single composite representation while maintain-ing data integrity. Traditionally, HVs are generated using pseudo-random methods, such as using Linear-Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) in hardware, which may lead to limited orthogonality and degraded performance. To overcome this limitation, quasi-random sequences such as Sobol have been introduced [26], improving orthogonality and enhancing the reliability of neuro-symbolic encodings. III. P ROPOSED METHOD 

A. Dual-Branch Autoencoder-based Network 

Figure 1 presents the overall OASIS architecture. The framework contains three principal learned components: a lightweight encoder E executed on the logic chip integrated with the CIS, a reconstruction decoder D that participates only during training, and an application-dependent processing branch that operates off-chip. This organization deliberately separates the representation-learning problem from final task inference. During deployment, the sensor-side encoder pro-duces the representation that is communicated to the external processor, whereas the reconstruction decoder is completely removed from the inference datapath. 

On-chip Encoder Backbone : The objective of E is to trans-form the sensor input into a latent tensor whose size is substantially smaller than that of the original image while retaining information useful to the downstream application. We develop compact ResNet- and SwinViT-based encoders to study this design across convolutional and transformer architectures. Both variants are constructed so that spatial reduction occurs aggressively and channel growth is tightly controlled, limiting both intermediate memory demand and the volume of information that must ultimately leave the sensor. For the ResNet implementation, we adopt a compact resid-ual structure inspired by [27]. The number of residual stages is reduced relative to a conventional ResNet configuration, and stride-2 operations progressively decrease the spatial resolution. The encoder therefore performs a large fraction of the required dimensionality reduction before its output reaches the sensor-to-host interface. For the transformer im-plementation, we construct a lightweight network based on the hierarchical Swin Transformer [28]. Increasing the initial patch size from 4 to 8 reduces the number of tokens generated from a high-resolution input, while hierarchical downsam-pling further reduces the representation in subsequent stages. Channel expansion is deliberately limited in the early stages and reduced more aggressively near the encoder output. A final pooling layer is used where required to reach the target spatial dimension. These choices are motivated by the memory organization of the sensor-integrated logic die. A conventional backbone may gradually increase its feature dimension before achieving substantial spatial reduction, making it difficult to retain model parameters and intermediate activations in the available on-chip memories. In contrast, the compact OASIS encoders are designed so that both the model and working feature buffers can be accommodated locally, avoiding external DRAM accesses within the sensor-side processing stage. The resulting encoder output is subsequently handled by either the quantization-and-Huffman path or the HDC classification path described below. 

Decoder Branch : The decoder D provides reconstruction su-pervision during training but introduces no cost during de-ployed inference. The quantized encoder representation is first mapped back to its continuous-valued form and perturbed using simulated Gaussian noise before being supplied to the decoder. The noise injection exposes the decoder and encoder to perturbations associated with finite-precision representation and encourages the learned latent to remain stable under quantization. We organize D using an expand–contract–expand (ECE) structure. The first expansion increases representational ca-pacity so that fine-grained information contained in the com-pressed latent can be recovered. The contraction stage then suppresses nonessential variation and encourages the network to preserve the features most useful for representing the input. Finally, the second expansion restores the spatial and channel dimensions needed for comparison with the original image. The reconstruction objective computed from this output provides an additional self-supervised signal during training, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 4De-quantizer  

> In-Sensor Computing
> !𝑋 𝑋 ECE-decoder
> 𝒟
> Huffman decoding
> 𝑌
> 𝑍 !"#$%&'
> 𝑍 !"#$%&'

+

> Gaussian noise ...
> Task-specific networks
> Task-Specific Processor
> Training-Time Module
> Label MSE( * 𝑋, 𝑋) 𝐿 '%()
> 𝐿 "%&'*+,-
> Image Sensor
> Training Inference
> ++
> Total Loss
> Associative memory
> 𝑌
> ... Hyper-vector

TSV MIPI 

> ℎ
> HDC alternative path Quantization + Huffman coding path
> Quantizer
> Huffman coding
> 𝑍 #$%&'
> In-Sensor Processor
> HDC encoder
> ℎ
> Lightweight encoder
> ℰ
> Hyper-vector
> De-quantizer
> Encoder trained once, shared by both paths

Fig. 1. Overview of the dual-branch autoencoder-based in-sensor computing architecture. The system integrates an image sensor with an in-sensor processor 

that implements a lightweight encoder E. The output then is processed via two alternative paths: ① the default path, where quantization and Huffman coding compress the activations before transmission over MIPI to an off-chip task-specific processor that performs Huffman decoding, de-quantization, and task-specific inference; and ② the HDC path, where the encoder latent is instead mapped on-chip to a fixed-dimensional hypervector h and transmitted directly to an off-chip associative memory that predicts the label Y via similarity search against stored class prototypes, eliminating the need for a separate classifier network. A decoder branch, active only during training, reconstructs the input from the de-quantized encoder output to provide reconstruction supervision. 

helping the encoder retain useful information even when its latent dimension is aggressively constrained. 

Off-chip Task-Specific Branch : For the structured compression path, the transmitted stream is first Huffman decoded and de-quantized by the task-specific processor. The resulting latent representation is then consumed directly by the downstream network. The exact back-end architecture depends on the application: VWW uses a classification head, whereas hand and eye tracking employ networks that preserve and process spatially organized information. Importantly, the reconstruc-tion decoder is not involved in this path during inference. For the HDC alternative, the structured latent is instead converted on-chip to a hypervector and the conventional off-chip task-specific classifier is replaced by associative-memory similarity search, as described in Section III-C. 

B. Training Methodology 

The complete network is optimized end-to-end so that com-pression does not become an isolated objective that destroys information needed by the application. We therefore combine reconstruction supervision, entropy regularization, and the downstream task objective as 

L = MSE( X, ˆX) + βLentropy + γLtask , (1) where X is the input image, ˆX is the output reconstructed by D, and β and γ determine the relative contributions of the entropy and task losses, respectively. The reconstruction term constrains the compressed representation to retain information about the sensor input, while Ltask explicitly preserves fea-tures needed by the target application. The entropy term acts directly on the quantized encoder latent and is defined as 

Lentropy = max  EZquant ∼P [− log 2 P (Zquant )] − Href , 0 .

(2) Here, P denotes the empirical probability distribution of the quantized representation, P (Zquant ) is the probability assigned to a particular quantized encoder value, and Href specifies the target entropy. Following [29], we estimate this discrete distri-bution using histogram statistics collected from the quantized latent. When its expected coding entropy exceeds Href , the loss encourages the encoder to redistribute its outputs toward a smaller set of frequently occurring symbols. This makes the representation better suited to entropy coding without directly constraining every latent element to the same value. Quantization effects are incorporated during optimization using quantization-aware training (QAT) [30]. Thus, the down-stream task model and reconstruction branch observe the finite-precision representation that will be available during inference instead of being trained exclusively on full-precision activations. Because the rounding operation used by quanti-zation is non-differentiable, we employ the straight-through estimator (STE) [31], approximating the backward derivative through the quantizer as 

∂L

∂Z ≈ ∂L

∂Z quant 

, (3) where Z and Zquant denote the full-precision and quantized encoder outputs. We use symmetric uniform quantization [32] and update the quantization range during training using a momentum-based procedure. For the branches that operate on a continuous representation, the quantized value is mapped back according to Zdequant = Zquant qscale , with qscale = 

> 2 max 2n−1

. Here, max represents the dynamically maintained magnitude of the encoder-output range and n denotes the selected bit precision. This procedure exposes the encoder to the representation constraints encountered at deployment while retaining a differentiable optimization path through the remainder of the network. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 5

C. HDC as an Alternative Classification Path 

While quantization-aware training with Huffman coding serves as our default compression mechanism, it compresses the encoder output element-wise . The latent tensor retains its shape and each element is represented with a reduced effective bit-width. We additionally explore HDC as an alternative on-chip path for classification tasks, in which the encoder latent is not quantized and transmitted as a feature map, but instead transformed into a single fixed-dimensional hypervector that crosses the sensor-to-host interface. In this configuration, the off-chip “task-specific network” is replaced by an associative-memory similarity search, and no decodable spatial feature map is required downstream. Consequently, this path is appli-cable only to classification workloads (e.g., VWW) and not to the dense-prediction tasks (hand and eye tracking) that require spatially structured outputs. 

Latent-to-Hypervector Encoding . Let z ∈ Rm denote the flattened encoder latent produced by E on the logic chip. Rather than quantizing z, we map it into a D-dimensional hypervector space, where D is chosen independently of the latent dimensionality m. This decoupling is the source of HDC’s bandwidth behavior: the volume of data crossing the link is governed by D rather than by the latent shape, so the achievable reduction is set directly by the chosen hypervector dimension (Table VII). Each normalized latent feature ˜zm is quantized to a level index k = ⌊˜zm(L − 1) ⌋ and associated with a level hypervector ⃗ Lk drawn from a precomputed set 

{⃗Lℓ}L−1 

> ℓ=0

.

Sobol-Sequence Level Generation . The quality of an HDC model depends critically on the quasi-orthogonality of its level hypervectors. Pseudo-random generators such as LFSRs yield correlated vectors that degrade separability in high dimensions. Following [26], we instead generate level hypervectors from a low-discrepancy Sobol sequence, which improves orthog-onality and yields more reliable encodings at a given D,directly benefiting the accuracy–dimension trade-off reported in Section VI-C. 

Binding, Bundling, and Class Prototypes . The per-feature level hypervectors are combined through lightweight, logic-only operations: binding (element-wise multiplication for bipolar encodings, or XOR in the binary case) and bundling (accumulation followed by a sign operation) merge them into a single sample hypervector ⃗ h = sign( P

> m

⃗v m).During training, each sample hypervector is accumulated into the prototype of its ground-truth class, and the final per-class prototypes are obtained by a sign operation over the accumulators (Algorithm 1). This single-pass training requires no gradient backpropagation and maps natively to low-power digital hardware. 

Inference . At inference, a query latent is encoded into a hypervector via the same procedure and compared against all stored class prototypes using a similarity metric; the highest-scoring class is returned as the prediction. Because encoding and similarity search reduce to permute/bind/bundle/compare primitives over D-dimensional vectors, the entire classification path avoids the multi-bit MAC arithmetic of a conventional classifier head, and the stochastic, distributed nature of the 

Algorithm 1 Sobol-Based HDC Training                                                                        

> 1: Input: D={(⃗xi, y i)}Ni=1 ,D,L
> 2: Output: {⃗Pc}Cc=1
> 3: {⃗Lℓ}L−1
> ℓ=0 ←Sobol (D, L )
> 4: ⃗Ac←⃗0∈RD,∀c
> 5: for i= 1 to Ndo
> 6: ˜⃗xi←Norm (⃗xi)
> 7: for m= 1 to |˜⃗xi|do
> 8: k← ⌊ ˜xi,m (L−1) ⌋
> 9: ⃗vm←⃗Lk
> 10: end for
> 11: ⃗hi←sign  P
> m⃗vm
> 
> 12: ⃗Ayi←⃗Ayi+⃗hi
> 13: end for
> 14: for c= 1 to Cdo
> 15: ⃗Pc←sign (⃗Ac)
> 16: end for
> 17: return {⃗Pc}Encoding Training
> Encoded Query
> 𝒉 𝑫−𝟏 𝒉 𝑫

…

…

> …
> Model
> 𝛿 1
> 𝛿 2
> 𝛿 3
> 𝛿 𝑘

…

> Similarity
> max
> Inference
> Data
> Training Data

…

…  

> Associative Memory
> 1
> 2
> …
> -1
> +1
> -1
> -1
> +1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> -1
> D
> HV
> HV
> To
> each
> class
> 𝒉 𝟏
> 𝑐 3𝐷
> 𝑐 21
> 𝑐 31
> 𝑐 21
> 𝑐 1𝐷 𝑐 11
> 𝑐 𝑘−1 𝑐 𝑘𝐷
> -1
> +1
> -1
> -1
> +1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> +1
> -1
> -1
> -1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> -1
> +1
> +1
> -1
> -1
> 1
> 2
> …
> D
> Fig. 2. Overview of an HDC model: encoding, training, and classification via similarity search.

representation provides intrinsic tolerance to bit-flip errors and hardware noise, an attractive property for in-sensor deploy-ment. The overall encode–train–classify workflow is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

D. Huffman Coding 

After quantization, the encoder activations occupy a discrete alphabet whose symbols occur with markedly different prob-abilities. Figure 3 shows that the resulting distributions are concentrated around a relatively small subset of the available 

4-bit values rather than being uniformly distributed. We exploit this property using Huffman coding [33]. A binary code tree is constructed from the measured symbol frequencies such that high-probability values receive short codewords and infrequent values are represented using longer sequences. Consequently, the average number of bits required for an encoder value can be substantially smaller than the nominal 4-bit representation. Because this transformation is lossless, Huffman decoding exactly recovers the quantized symbol sequence at the receiver and therefore introduces no additional accuracy degradation beyond that already associated with quantization. 

Huffman Coding Is Not Applied to HDC Hypervectors. Bit-wise Huffman coding does not benefit the HDC path. A binary source has only two symbols, {0, 1}, so a Huffman tree always assigns each a 1-bit codeword regardless of skew, yielding no IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 6

> Fig. 3. Probability distribution of the 4-bit quantized encoder output for input images from the evaluation sets of (a) the Visual Wake Words (VWW) dataset for image classification, and (b) the Stereo Hand Pose Tracking Benchmark (STB) dataset for hand tracking.

compression. This is consistent with our Sobol-based level hypervectors, which are designed to be low-discrepancy and quasi-orthogonal, pushing bit distributions toward uniformity rather than the skew Huffman coding requires. We therefore transmit the D = 64 hypervector bits directly, without an entropy-coding stage. IV. S YSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

The envisioned OASIS platform combines the imaging front end, sensor-side computation, and external task processing as shown in Fig. 1. The active-pixel sensor (APS) first converts the optical input into electrical signals and digitizes the re-sulting pixel values. These values are transferred through the local die-to-die interface to the integrated logic layer, where the lightweight encoder and the selected post-encoder process-ing path are executed. Only the compressed representation is subsequently communicated to the external task-specific processor. 

A. Active Pixel Sensor 

The APS employs column-parallel readout [34], with the pixels in each column sharing the analog-to-digital conversion circuitry located at the edge of the array [35]. Pixel voltages are therefore converted into digital values before entering the sensor-side compute layer. In the proposed heterogeneous organization, this digital stream is transferred directly to the logic die rather than being sent immediately through the conventional external camera interface. Locating the learned encoder next to the sensor also removes the need to exe-cute a complete conventional image-signal-processing pipeline before task-oriented feature extraction. Moreover, because the downstream model is trained jointly with the sensor-side representation, the acquisition and processing pipeline can tolerate lower numerical precision than a general-purpose imaging path that must preserve high-fidelity pixels for arbi-trary human viewing. Column-level low-power architectures, including successive approximation register (SAR) and multi-ramp ADCs, provide potential implementation options for trading conversion resolution against energy while maintaining the information required by the learned encoder. 

B. Efficient In-Sensor Processor 

The digital sensor-side accelerator uses a weight-stationary organization to reduce repeated movement of model parame-ters. Each processing element contains a quantized multiply– accumulate (MAC) datapath together with local storage used by the activation and weight operands. Because both OASIS encoders are intentionally compact, their parameters can reside entirely in on-chip BRAM, eliminating the need to fetch weights from an external DRAM during encoder inference. The two encoder families require different strategies for man-aging their intermediate data. In the SwinViT implementation, attention is restricted to local windows, and the feature map is processed one window at a time. Query, key, value, and attention-score storage therefore scales with the window size rather than with the full feature map. For the ResNet imple-mentation, a small collection of scratch buffers is reused across successive residual blocks. This prevents memory capacity from growing in proportion to the number of network stages and allows intermediate activations to remain local to the accelerator. We exploit pipeline parallelism and loop-level concur-rency throughout the implementation. For ResNet, the spatial convolution-kernel loops are fully unrolled, while accumu-lation across input channels is unrolled by a factor of four. Corresponding weight arrays are partitioned along the input-channel dimension so that the parallel MAC operations can access independent memory banks without creating port-contention bottlenecks. Batch-normalization, activation, and residual-addition stages are pipelined with an initiation interval (II) of 1. A similar strategy is applied to the linear projections in the SwinViT encoder. The input-channel accumulation loops for the query, key, value, and output projections are unrolled by four, and the associated arrays are partitioned to provide the required memory bandwidth. Attention-score generation and the subsequent probability-weighted value accumulation are performed independently for each local window and are pipelined with II = 1 . Intermediate buffers and inner ac-cumulation dimensions are further partitioned to sustain this parallelism. For the structured output path, the 4-bit quantizer and 16 -entry Huffman lookup table are also implemented as pipelined stages with II = 1. The lookup table is fully partitioned into registers so that the variable-length code corresponding to each input symbol can be obtained within a single cycle. A 

64 -bit shift register accumulates these variable-length codes and emits packed 32 -bit output words. The HDC path is separately pipelined across latent features, with its hypervector accumulator fully partitioned so that all dimensions of the representation can be updated concurrently. On the AMD Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC implementa-tion, the SwinViT encoder occupies approximately 37 K LUTs, 

49 K flip-flops, 122 DSP48E2 slices, and 474 BRAM18K blocks, whereas the ResNet encoder requires approximately 

21 K LUTs, 21 K flip-flops, 66 DSP48E2 slices, and 177 

BRAM18K blocks. The post-encoder modules are much smaller: the Quantizer+Huffman implementation uses approx-imately 5K LUTs and the HDC module approximately 3KLUTs. Neither backend requires DSP resources, and each uses only two BRAM18K blocks. Thus, the hardware cost of selecting either post-encoder representation is small relative to the corresponding encoder accelerator. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 7

V. H ARDWARE -VALIDATED SYSTEM ENERGY MODELING 

A system-level evaluation of near-sensor processing must account for more than the arithmetic energy of the neural network. Sensor readout, data conversion, die-to-die commu-nication, external transmission, digital encoder execution, and downstream task processing each contribute to the frame-level cost. We therefore combine Monte-Carlo circuit simulation 

of the analog front-end, sweeping device mismatch and pro-cess, voltage, and temperature (PVT) variation across many randomized trials to capture worst-case as well as nominal behavior, with FPGA-based hardware measurements of the digital compute pipeline, rather than relying exclusively on analytical per-operation estimates [7], [10], [36]. 

A. Energy Model Formulation 

The total energy per frame, ET otal , is expressed as: 

ET otal = EAps + ET sv + EInf + EEnc + EBack (4) where EAps , ET sv , EInf , EEnc , and EBack denote the energy contributions of the APS, TSV interface, sensor interface, encoder, and the task-specific back-end processor, respectively [10]. Note that the baseline non-in-sensor hardware does not incur ET sv , however, it incurs significantly higher EInf that dominates ET otal .

B. APS Energy Consumption 

The APS consumes per-frame energy in different opera-tional modes, that is estimated as: 

EAps =  Eread/pix + EADC/pix 

 · Npix (5) where Eread/pix , and EADC/pix are the energy consumed in read-out and ADC conversion for each pixel respectively. From our in-house circuit simulations in 22nm GlobalFoundries FDSOI technology, Eread/pix + EADC/pix ≈ 63 .6 pJ for 8-bit pixels. 

C. Communication Energy 

Data transfer between the different hardware components in our proposed system occurs through multiple communication interfaces, each with distinct energy characteristics. 

1) Through-Silicon Via (TSV) Energy : TSV is used for high-bandwidth, low-energy connections between the sensor and on-sensor compute layer. The energy per transmit-ted byte for TSV communication for an input image is 

ET SV =AT SV ·EByte,T SV , where AT SV represents the trans-mitted data size in bytes, and EByte,T SV =6 .25 pJ [37] denotes the TSV energy per byte. 2) MIPI or other Wired/Wireless Interface Energy: The Mo-bile Industry Processor Interface (MIPI) is used to transfer processed data from the sensor to an external processor. The energy consumption is given by Einf = ASize · EByte,inf ,where EByte,inf =100 pJ [38]. Our autoencoder system sig-nificantly reduces Ainf , which dominates the total energy, as evaluated in Section VI-B. While MIPI is standard for most sensor interfaces to off-chip hardware, remote processing scenarios often utilize wired (Ethernet, USB) or wireless (Wi-Fi, 5G) communication interfaces to transmit compressed data to cloud-based or edge processors. In such cases, EByte,inf 

can be substantially higher, depending on the specific commu-nication technology. Consequently, our distributed in-sensor computing approach, which minimizes data transmission re-quirements, becomes even more effective in reducing the overall energy consumption. 

D. FPGA-Based Encoder Energy Characterization 

To obtain an accurate and empirically grounded estimate of encoder energy, we measure the power consumption of the complete inference pipeline, including the encoder backbone, quantizer, and Huffman encoder, directly on an FPGA proto-type. This captures the full system behavior including control logic overhead, memory access patterns, pipeline stalls, and interconnect losses, which are difficult to account for in purely analytical models that estimate compute energy from per-MAC operation counts alone [6], [7]. 

1) Power Measurement Methodology : Power consumption is estimated using the post-implementation power analysis re-ports generated by Xilinx Vivado. Dynamic power is obtained from switching-activity-based estimates of the programmable logic (PL) design, while static power corresponds to the device leakage reported by the tool. The reported power values are derived from the final placed-and-routed design operating at the target clock frequency and are used to compare the relative energy efficiency of different encoder configurations. The frame-level encoder energy is computed as EF P GA Enc = (Pactive − Pidle ) × Tf rame , where Pactive 

and Pidle denote the measured active and idle PL power respectively, and Tf rame is the per-frame inference latency. 

2) ASIC Energy Projection : The FPGA measurement provides a verified upper bound on encoder energy. To project the energy for a custom 7nm ASIC implementation, which is representative of the envisioned co-packaged logic chip, we apply established FPGA-to-ASIC scaling factors. Based on comparative studies of identical designs implemented on both platforms [39], FPGA-to-ASIC energy ratios range from 14 ×

to 40 × depending on design complexity, with digital signal processing kernels (most analogous to our encoder) exhibiting ratios of approximately 20 × when scaling from 16nm FinFET FPGAs to 7nm ASIC technology: EASIC Enc ≈ EF P GA Enc  

> αF P GA →ASIC

,where αF P GA →ASIC ≈ 20 reflects the combined overhead of programmable routing and LUT fabric ( ∼7–10 ×), technology node scaling from 16nm to 7nm ( ∼2–3 ×), and generic BRAM versus custom memory macros ( ∼1.5–2 ×) [39]. Importantly, the FPGA prototype captures the complete encoder pipeline 

including control logic, memory access patterns, and datapath overhead, effects that are absent in analytical per-MAC esti-mates. Even without ASIC scaling, the FPGA measurements provide a realistic and reproducible energy characterization that strengthens the credibility of our system-level claims. We estimate the energy consumed by the task-specific back-end (EBack ) similarly using FPGA measurements. 

E. Huffman Coding/Decoding Energy 

The energy associated with entropy coding is evaluated separately from the neural-network computation. Huffman en-coding consists primarily of symbol-to-codeword lookup and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 8          

> Fig. 4. Accuracy vs. Representation Dimension comparison on VWW classification task for ( Left ) ResNet and ( Right ) SwinViT based architecture, where ddenotes the channel dimension of the encoder output.

bitstream packing, whereas decoding additionally requires re-covery of the corresponding symbols from the variable-length representation. Using previously reported low-power entropy-coding implementations [40] together with technology-scaling assumptions for the projected 7-nm implementation, we use 

EHuff -enc = 0 .96 pJ /byte , and EHuff -dec = 1 .15 pJ /byte .For an encoder payload of Aenc bytes, the corresponding coding contribution is therefore 

EHuff = Aenc (EHuff -enc + EHuff -dec ) . (6) Although decoding has a slightly higher per-byte cost than encoding, the combined entropy-coding energy remains much smaller than the energy associated with transferring an equiva-lent amount of data through the external interface or repeatedly accessing off-chip memory. VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

A. Task Performance 

We evaluate our dual-branch approach on resource-constrained tasks pertinent to smart home and AR applications, specifically focusing on Visual Wake Words (VWW) [41] classification, hand tracking, and eye tracking. We quantize the encoder output to 4 bits and train the entire network end-to-end for 200 epochs using AdamW with a cosine learning rate scheduler, setting Href = 0 .7. For VWW, we set β=2 ,

γ=2 , lr =0 .002 and weight decay of 1e-5, where lr denotes the learning rate. For hand tracking, we set β=2 , γ=4 , lr =0 .1

and weight decay of 1e-5. For eye-tracking, we set β=2 , γ=4 ,and train our network using an Adam optimizer with an initial lr of 1e-3 following the same configurations given in [42]. 

1) VWW Classification : VWW evaluates whether an image contains a person and is commonly used as a benchmark for always-on and resource-constrained visual recognition [41]. We resize each input to 224 × 224 pixels and evaluate both ResNet- and SwinViT-based OASIS encoders so that the impact of the compression framework can be examined across convolutional and transformer backbones. 

a) ResNet-based Autoencoder : Our compact ResNet-based encoder consists of three layers, each with two residual blocks. The initial convolutional module uses a 7×7 kernel with a stride of 4 for aggressive downsampling. The channel dimen-sions of the three layers are configured as [128 , 256 , d ], where 

d represents the encoder output channel dimension, which we     

> Fig. 5. Left: Comparison of 2D estimation AUC and PCK curves, truncated at 30mm, against the baseline. Right: Comparison of 3D estimation AUC and PCK curves, truncated within a deviation range of 20mm to 50mm. Baseline model is an encoder-only network with d =16, s =12.

vary to explore compression benefits. We apply uniform spatial downsampling with factors of 2 per layer, achieving a spatial dimension of s×s at the encoder output. The ECE-decoder progressively reconstructs the feature maps, with layer di-mensions [d, 256 , 128 , 256 , 128 , 64] and corresponding spatial scaling factors [2 ↑, 1, 2↑, 2↓, 2↑, 2↑], where 2↑ and 2↓ denote up-sampling and down-sampling by a factor of 2, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4, even with substantial compression—e.g., 

d=16 and s=1 our method achieves significantly enhanced performance compared to the baseline configuration, which uses an encoder-only network under the same settings. b) SwinViT-based Autoencoder : Our SwinViT-based encoder di-vides the input image into patches of size 8×8 and uses a window size of 7. The encoder comprises four stages (with two blocks per stage) and produces feature maps with dimensions 

[64 , 128 , 160 , d ] and head number [2 , 4, 5, 4] for the four stages. The output of ECE-decoder for each stage is with channel dimensions [d, 160 , 128 , 160 , 128 , 64] , head number 

[4 , 5, 4, 5, 4, 2] and spatial scaling factors [2 ↑, 1, 2↑, 2↓, 2↑, 2↑].Fig. 4 shows that across various compression settings, our method consistently outperforms the baseline (an encoder-only network with channel dimensions [64 , 128 , 160 , 16] ), achieving significant performance gains while maintaining aggressive compression. 

2) Hand Tracking : We use the Stereo Hand Pose Tracking dataset (STB) [43], which utilizes RGB data from the Intel RealSense F200 camera to estimate both 2D and 3D hand keypoints. The images were center-cropped and resized to 

96 ×96 pixels, removing redundant background while preserv-ing the primary hand region. We adopt the KeyNet-F [44] architecture, modifying the encoder to include four layers with channel dimensions [32 , 32 , 32 , 64 , d ], where d represents the encoder output channel dimension, which we vary along with the spatial dimension s×s to explore compression benefits. We also develop an additional branch for the ECE-decoder with channel configurations [d, 32 , 64 , 32 , 32] and spatial scal-ing factors [2 ↑, 2↑, 2↓, 2↑, 1] . The task-specific network com-prises a fused network, a keypoint heatmap network for generating 2D heatmaps, and a distance network, implemented to produce distance heatmaps for 3D keypoint estimation. Figure 5 illustrates the impact of d and s on 2D and 3D hand keypoint estimation tasks. For 2D tasks, a higher channel IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 9                       

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF EYE SEGMENTATION RESULTS BETWEEN EYE NET AND OUR NETWORK ON OPEN EDS DATASET W /AND W /OROI PREDICTION .
> Model Inp. Dim. Enc. Out Dim. mIoU
> EyeNet (1, 400, 640) (32, 25, 40) 0.988 EyeNet (w/ ROI) (1, 240, 560) (32, 15, 35) 0.967 Ours (1, 400, 640) (4, 25, 40) 0.974 Ours (w/ ROI) (1, 240, 560) (4, 15, 35) 0.939 VWW-ResNet VWW-SwinViT Hand Tracking Eye Tracking 012345
> Normalized Energy
> (a)
> Baseline Our Approach VWW-ResNet VWW-SwinViT 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> (b)
> 11985× 8430× 21× 14× Our Approach P2M
> Bandwidth Reduction
> Fig. 6. (a) Normalized energy consumption comparison between our approach and baseline across different vision tasks and models. (b) Comparison of bandwidth reduction with respect to the input image between our approach and P 2M. Our autoencoder-based system achieves substantial bandwidth reductions, which enables more efficient data transmission and contributes to the overall energy savings shown in (a). We report P²M bandwidth savings only for VWW tasks since these are the only common benchmarks in [7]. For fair comparison, we use identical convolutional and pooling strides in the first layer for both ResNet and SwinViT models.

count ( d=16 ) and higher spatial resolution ( s=12 ) yielded an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.880, outperforming the baseline of 0.746. However, reducing the dimension count to 

d=4 and s=3 resulted in a lower AUC of 0.785. On 3D tasks, our networks achieved AUC values exceeding the baseline of 0.958. Even under aggressive compression ( d=16 and s=3 ), the AUC remained high at 0.969. 

3) Eye Tracking : Our eye tracking pipeline consists of two stages: (1) feature extraction for eye segmentation, followed by (2) gaze estimation. We use the EyeNet model as baseline [42], a lightweight U-Net based segmentation model, and evaluate our approach on the OpenEDS [45] dataset in Table I. To reduce data transmission bandwidth, we apply channel reduction from 32 to 4 at the encoder output of EyeNet using our proposed losses. Combined with 4-bit quantization, this achieves a 192 × reduction in the encoder activation dimension as compared to 8-bit image inputs, and 24 × reduction over encoder output size for baseline EyeNet with a mIoU degra-dation of only 1.4%, as shown in Table I. Further compression is possible through region-of-interest (ROI) prediction [42], achieving up to 364 × overall reduction ( 1.9× reduction in input size via ROI). Since ROI prediction relies on previous frames, mIoU may improve over full sequences. However, due to limited annotated frames, evaluation is constrained, leading to mIoU degradation with ROI. 

B. Efficiency 1) System Energy & Communication : We compute the total energy consumed by our in-sensor computing hardware and baseline hardware using the energy model developed in Sec-tion V. The energy components differ in several important aspects. The APS energy in Section V-B remains identical for both hardware implementations. The in-sensor computing hardware incurs an additional TSV energy of 0.94 μJ for an input resolution of 224 2 for internal data transmission between the sensor and logic chip, which the baseline hardware does not incur. OASIS supports two complementary mechanisms for reduc-ing off-chip communication. In the quantization-and-Huffman path, the encoder reduces the spatial and channel dimensions of the activation, after which 4-bit quantization and entropy coding further reduce the transmitted bit volume. For example, the configuration with a 4×4×4 latent representation provides 

RQuant+Huff = 224 × 224 × 3 × 84 × 4 × 4 × 1.57 ≈ 11 ,985 ×, (7) where 1.57 is the measured effective number of bits per latent symbol after Huffman coding. For classification workloads, the HDC path provides a more aggressive operating point. The SwinViT encoder produces a 3 × 3 × 8 latent tensor with 1.57 measured effective number of bits, corresponding to 

Blatent =3 × 3 × 8 × 1.57=113 .57 bits . (8) Mapping the encoder representation alternatively to a 64-dimensional binary hypervector reduces the sensor-to-host communication by 

RHDC |latent = 113 .57 64 =1 .77 × . (9) Relative to the raw 224 × 224 × 3 8-bit image, the resulting communication reduction is 

RHDC |raw = 224 × 224 × 3 × 864 =18 ,816 × . (10) Accordingly, relative to raw-image transmission, Quant+Huff and HDC reduce the transmitted MIPI payload, and hence the modeled MIPI communication energy, by approximately 

11 ,985 × and 18 ,816 ×, respectively. For this configuration, HDC therefore provides an additional 1.57 × communication reduction over Quant+Huff.” As shown in Fig. 6(a), our approach reduces the vision pipeline energy by ∼2× compared to baseline non-in-sensor systems across most tasks, with an exceptional ∼4.5× reduc-tion for the SwinViT-based VWW task. This greater efficiency stems from our tiny SwinViT encoder, which significantly reduces the multi-head self-attention module size, drastically lowering the encoder energy by 13 .4× (our ResNet encoder reduces energy only by 1.15 ×) and peak memory require-ments. Unlike traditional DNN backbones that struggle to aggressively reduce activation dimensions and often require external DRAM access due to their larger memory footprint, our autoencoder-based approach optimizes the vision pipeline while respecting the strict compute and memory constraints of edge devices. Moreover, as shown in Table II, our approach achieves 22.7 TOPS/W, nearly twice the efficiency of prior works (11.49 TOPS/W in DPCE [16]), while maintaining high accuracy. Unlike DPCE’s binary multiplications, our method supports full multi-bit operations for complex convolution and self-attention functions. Compared to analog in-sensor IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 10 

computing systems such as P 2M [7], our method extracts substantially more compression from the sensor-side logic. We note that this is not a controlled, like-for-like comparison: P 2Mperforms analog computation of only the first convolutional block within the pixel array, whereas OASIS performs digital 

multi-layer encoding on a logic chip after the TSV interface, in a different technology context. The two therefore occupy different points in the in-sensor design space rather than being direct substitutes. What the comparison does isolate, because both operate on the same 224 ×224 input resolution, is how much activation compression each paradigm can achieve before the off-sensor link: P 2M reduces bandwidth by ∼ 21 ×

via a single analog convolution, while our learned multi-objective encoder reduces it by ∼ 11985 ×. The resulting ratio (Fig. 6(b)) reflects the architectural advantage of a trained compression front-end over a single fixed analog layer, not a normalized per-layer or per-technology efficiency claim. 

2) FPGA Backend and Resource Efficiency : To complement the system-level energy analysis, Table III reports the hardware-measured latency and energy of the encoder acceler-ators and the two post-encoder processing paths implemented on the AMD Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC. The ResNet and SwinViT encoders consume 33 .8 mJ and 45 .4 mJ per inference, respectively, whereas both post-encoder backends operate in the sub-2 μJ regime. Consequently, the additional processing required after the learned encoder contributes less than 0.01% of the corresponding encoder energy in all evaluated configurations. HDC is also more energy-efficient than Quant+Huff at the post-encoder stage for both encoder families. For the ResNet output, the measured backend energy decreases from 1.805 μJ with Quant+Huff to 0.729 μJ with HDC, corresponding to a 59 .6% reduction. For SwinViT, the backend energy decreases from 1.775 μJ to 0.520 μJ, a 70 .7% 

reduction. Thus, although both backends are negligible relative to the encoder itself, the HDC path provides a consistently lower-energy classification backend. Table IV further compares the FPGA resource utilization and measured dynamic power of the individual hardware mod-ules. The HDC backend requires 3,258 LUTs and 4,103 FFs, compared with 5,031 LUTs and 4,960 FFs for Quant+Huff, corresponding to reductions of 35 .2% and 17 .3% , respec-tively. Both implementations require only two BRAM18K blocks and no DSP resources. HDC exhibits a slightly higher instantaneous dynamic power ( 29 mW versus 25 mW for Quant+Huff), but its substantially shorter execution time re-sults in lower total energy per inference. Overall, both post-encoder modules introduce only a small hardware footprint relative to the ResNet and SwinViT encoder accelerators. 

3) Latency : The communication reduction provided by OASIS also directly affects end-to-end latency. In conventional vision pipelines, APS readout and subsequent transmission of the image or intermediate activations over MIPI can represent a substantial portion of the processing delay. OASIS instead transfers the raw sensor output over the high-bandwidth TSV interface and communicates only the compact learned repre-sentation through MIPI. The TSV interface provides approxi-mately 200 × greater bandwidth than MIPI [37], [38], making the local sensor-to-logic transfer comparatively small.                                                                               

> TABLE II COMPARISON OF IN -SENSOR COMPUTING APPROACHES WITH VARYING
> DNN S,TASKS ,AND CIS TECHNOLOGY NODES .
> Method Task Res. Tech. Network TOPS/W Acc.
> Senputing [15] MNIST 28² 180nm 2-layer MLP 4.7 93.76% SCAMP [8] MNIST 256² 180nm 2-layer CNN 0.535 93.0% MR-PIPA [14] MNIST 256² 180nm 3-layer CNN 1.89 97.26% DPCE [16] CIFAR10 32² -LeNet-5 11.49 87.20% PIPSIM [17] CIFAR10 64² 45nm LeNet-5 4.12 90.05% P2M [7] VWW 224² 22nm MobileNetV2 0.4 84.3%
> Ours VWW 224² 22nm Tiny SwinViT 15.5 88.2%
> Ours Hand Track 96² 22nm KeyNet-F 22.7 96.9%
> ∗1 OP = 1 MAC between weight and input activation in a DNN.
> TABLE III HARDWARE -MEASURED LATENCY AND ENERGY OF THE PROPOSED ENCODER , Q UANT +H UFF ,AND HDC MODULES IMPLEMENTED ON A
> XILINX ZYNQ ULTRA SCALE + MPS OC FPGA.
> Encoder Module Latency (ms) Energy ( μJ)
> ResNet (d=8, s=2) Bottleneck Encoder 123.42 33817.08 Quant+Huff 0.06944 1.805 HDC 0.03242 0.729 SwinViT (d=8, s=3) Attention Encoder 344.48 45421.06 Quant+Huff 0.06827 1.775 HDC 0.03156 0.520

The two OASIS paths provide different communication op-erating points. Quant+Huff reduces the transmitted bit volume by up to 11 ,985 × while retaining the spatially structured latent required by both classification and dense-prediction tasks. For classification, HDC further reduces the transmitted represen-tation to a fixed-dimensional binary hypervector, providing up to an 18 ,816 × reduction relative to the raw image. The FPGA measurements in Table III show that the post-encoder processing latency is negligible relative to encoder execution for both paths. Quant+Huff requires 0.06944 ms and 0.06827 ms for the ResNet and SwinViT encoder out-puts, respectively, whereas HDC requires only 0.03242 ms and 0.03156 ms. HDC therefore reduces the post-encoder processing latency by approximately 53 .3% for ResNet and 

53 .8% for SwinViT relative to Quant+Huff. In all cases, these latencies are orders of magnitude smaller than those of the encoder accelerators, confirming that neither compression path introduces a meaningful processing bottleneck. 

C. HDC Accuracy–Communication Trade-off 

We next examine the accuracy–communication trade-off of the HDC classification path described in Section III-C on the VWW dataset. Since the energy, latency, and FPGA imple-mentation costs of HDC and Quant+Huff are analyzed in Sec-tion VI-B, we focus here on how the hypervector dimension 

D and prototype retraining (RT) affect classification accuracy and transmitted representation size. We evaluate HDC us-ing fixed encoder-latent configurations for both architectures: 

(d = 8 , s = 3) for SwinViT and (d = 8 , s = 2) for ResNet. For each encoder, we consider two hypervector dimensions and compare the resulting accuracy and communication cost IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 11                          

> TABLE IV FPGA RESOURCE UTILIZATION AND MEASURED ON -BOARD DYNAMIC POWER
> Hardware Module LUT FF BRAM DSP Dynamic Power (W)
> ResNet Encoder 20,942 20,943 177 66 0.277 SwinViT Encoder †10,529 13,576 257 31 0.128 Quant + Huffman 5,031 4,960 200.025 HDC 3,258 4,103 200.029
> †Peak resource usage across separately implemented SwinViT blocks.

with the corresponding Quant+Huff pipeline. The results are summarized in Table VII. Table VII reports the HDC classification results across two hypervector dimensions for each encoder, both without and with prototype retraining (RT). Without RT, the SwinViT-based encoder achieves 86 .06% accuracy at D = 128 , while the ResNet-based encoder achieves 89 .78% at D = 64 .Retraining uses misclassified samples to adjust the class proto-types, moving the correct prototype closer to the sample while pushing the incorrect prototype away, and is performed for up to 30 epochs with a batch size of 512. This improves the accuracy to 86 .89% for SwinViT ( D = 128 ) and 90 .81% for ResNet ( D = 64 ). The communication reduction relative to the corresponding 4-bit encoder latent before Huffman coding is governed directly by D, yielding 2.25 × for SwinViT at 

D = 128 and 2.00 × for ResNet at D = 64 Interestingly, the accuracy impact of HDC is encoder dependent. For SwinViT, HDC provides additional communication reduction with a modest decrease in classification accuracy relative to the Quant+Huff path. In contrast, the ResNet-based HDC configuration with RT reaches 90 .81% accuracy, exceeding the 

87 .6% accuracy of the corresponding 4-bit Quant+Huff con-figuration reported in Table VI, while simultaneously reducing the transmitted representation size. We attribute this difference to the stronger class separability of the compressed ResNet features after normalization and projection into the hypervector space, which allows the resulting class prototypes to remain more distinguishable under cosine-similarity-based inference. Thus, HDC should not be viewed solely as an accuracy– efficiency trade-off: depending on the encoder representation, it can provide both improved classification accuracy and lower communication cost. Beyond these encoder-dependent accuracy characteristics, HDC offers several additional advantages for in-sensor clas-sification. Prototype construction is gradient-free and relies on lightweight bundling operations, avoiding the iterative backpropagation required by a conventional classifier head. Likewise, encoding and associative-memory inference reduce to permute/bind/bundle/compare operations over binary or bipolar vectors rather than multi-bit MAC arithmetic. The distributed hypervector representation additionally provides intrinsic tolerance to bit-flip errors and hardware noise, while Sobol-based level generation improves hypervector orthogo-nality relative to conventional pseudo-random generation and contributes to the observed accuracy–dimension trade-off.                              

> TABLE V ABLATION OF OASIS COMPONENTS ON VWW (S WIN VITENCODER ). BANDWIDTH REDUCTION IS RELATIVE TO THE RAW 224 2×3INPUT .
> Configuration Acc. (%) BW Red. ( ×)
> Encoder dim. reduction only 88.0 2,091 + entropy loss ( β)87.9 2,091 + 4-bit quantization 87.6 4,181 + Huffman coding (default path) 87.6 10,653 + HDC Encoding (HDC alter. path) 86.0 18,816 TABLE VI ENCODER OUTPUT BIT -WIDTH SWEEP ON VWW (R ES NET ENCODER ).
> Bit-width Acc. (%) Eff. bits (post-Huffman)
> 887.9 3.77 487.6 1.57 270.3 1.46

D. Ablation Study 

To isolate the contribution of each component, we ablate several mechanisms that jointly produce OASIS’s compression and accuracy on the VWW task with the SwinViT-based en-coder at a fixed latent configuration ( d =8, s =3): (i) encoder-side dimensionality reduction, (ii) the entropy regularization loss, (iii) 4-bit output quantization, (iv) Huffman coding, and (v) the HDC alternative in place of (iii)–(iv). Table V reports test accuracy and the resulting bandwidth reduction as each component is added. 

Effect of entropy regularization. Introducing the entropy regularization term has a negligible impact on the classification accuracy (88.0% →87.9%) while preserving the same commu-nication bandwidth. This indicates that the entropy objective mainly acts as a regularizer without introducing a measurable accuracy penalty in this setting. 

Effect of quantization bit-width. We additionally sweep the encoder output precision (Table VI) to identify the accuracy– bandwidth knee. Reducing the precision from 8 bits to 4 bits incurs only a marginal accuracy drop (87.9% →87.6%) while decreasing the post-Huffman effective bit-width from 3.77 to 1.57 bits. In contrast, further reducing the precision to 2 bits significantly degrades the accuracy to 70.3%, despite only a modest additional reduction in effective bit-width (1.46 bits). These results identify 4-bit quantization as the best operating point, achieving nearly the maximum communication reduc-tion while preserving almost all of the model accuracy. 

Effect of Huffman coding and the HDC alternative. Huff-man coding contributes the largest single jump in bandwidth reduction among all components (4,181 × → 10,653 ×) with no additional accuracy cost, confirming its role as a near-lossless entropy-coding stage on top of quantization. Replacing quantization and Huffman coding with the HDC path instead yields a further bandwidth reduction (10,653 × → 18,816 ×) at a modest accuracy cost (87.6% →86.0%) on SwinViT-based encoder. These results show that encoder-side dimensionality reduction is the primary contributor to accuracy retention, while quanti-zation and Huffman coding are responsible for the majority of the communication savings within the default pipeline, and the HDC path offers a further bandwidth-accuracy trade-off point IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 12 

TABLE VII INFERENCE ACCURACY AND COMMUNICATION COST ACROSS HDC DIMENSION (VWW DATASET). 

Encoder Dim. (HDC) Red. ( ×) Acc. w/o RT (%) Acc. w/ RT (%) 

SwinViT 64 4.50 85.87 86.02 128 2.25 86.06 86.89 ResNet 32 4.00 89.39 90.79 64 2.00 89.78 90.81 

> RT denotes retraining of the HDC class prototypes using misclassified training samples after their initial construction.

beyond it. This confirms that the final performance arises from the synergy of all components rather than any single design choice. VII. C ONCLUSIONS & D ISCUSSIONS 

We presented OASIS, a distributed in-sensor vision frame-work that jointly optimizes task accuracy, latent entropy, and reconstruction quality to generate compact representations before off-chip transmission. OASIS supports a quantization-and-Huffman path for classification and dense-prediction tasks, and a Sobol-based HDC path for highly compressed classification. For the SwinViT-based VWW model, mapping the 3 × 3 × 8 latent representation to a 64-dimensional binary hypervector provides an additional 1.77 × communication re-duction and an overall 18 ,816 × reduction relative to raw 8-bit image transmission. The quantization-and-Huffman path achieves up to 11 ,985 × reduction while preserving struc-tured features. Across visual wake-word classification, hand tracking, and eye tracking, OASIS reduces modeled total system energy by approximately 2×–4.5× while maintaining competitive accuracy. Because fabricating a heterogeneously integrated CIS and custom near-sensor logic die is beyond the practical scope of this study, we combine circuit simulation of the CIS front end, FPGA implementation and board-level power measure-ments, Vivado post-implementation analysis, and a 7-nm ASIC projection. Future work will explore adaptive compression, emerging-memory integration, higher-resolution applications, and multi-modal fusion across LiDAR, radar, and event-based sensors. Overall, OASIS provides a practical path toward low-power in-sensor vision for AR/VR, smart sensing, and autonomous systems. REFERENCES [1] C. Zhou, S. Sarkar, Y. Li, A. Sanyal, M. A.-A. Kaiser, S. Aygun, M. H. Najafi, and G. Datta, “OASIS: Optimized lightweight autoencoder system for distributed in-sensor computing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI) , 2026, to appear. [2] E. R. Fossum, “Cmos image sensors: Electronic camera-on-a-chip,” 

IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices , vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1689–1698, 1997. [3] R. Pinkham et al. , “Near-sensor distributed dnn processing for aug-mented and virtual reality,” IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 663–676, 2021. [4] “Sony to Release World’s First Intelligent Vision Sensors with AI Pro-cessing Functionality,” https://www.sony.com/en/SonyInfo/News/Press/ 202005/20-037E/, 2020, accessed: 12-01-2022. [5] Z. Chen et al. , “Processing near sensor architecture in mixed-signal do-main with cmos image sensor of convolutional-kernel-readout method,” 

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 389–400, 2020. [6] S. Angizi et al. , “Pisa: A non-volatile processing-in-sensor accelerator for imaging systems,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 962–972, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10179277 [7] G. Datta et al. , “P2M: A processing-in-pixel-in-memory paradigm for resource-constrained TinyML applications,” Scientific Reports , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 14396, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/ articles/s41598-022-17934-1 [8] L. Bose et al. , “Fully embedding fast convolutional networks on pixel processor arrays,” in Computer Vision - ECCV 2020 - 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23-28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXIX ,vol. 12374. Springer, 2020, pp. 488–503. [9] M. A.-A. Kaiser, G. Datta, J. Athas, C. Duffee, A. P. Jacob, P. K. Amiri, P. A. Beerel, and A. R. Jaiswal, “Voltage-controlled magnetic tunnel junction based adc-less global shutter processing-in-pixel for extreme-edge intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10592 , 2024. [10] J. Gomez et al. , “Distributed on-sensor compute system for AR/VR devices: A semi-analytical simulation framework for power estimation,” in Proceedings of the tinyML Research Symposium , 2022, p. 6. [11] Z. Yin, G. Datta, M. A.-A. Kaiser, P. Beerel, A. Jacob, and A. Jaiswal, “Design considerations for 3d heterogeneous integration driven analog processing-in-pixel for extreme-edge intelligence,” in 2023 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Rebooting Computing (ICRC) , 2023. [12] G. K. Wallace, “The jpeg still picture compression standard,” Commu-nications of the ACM , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 30–44, 1991. [13] R. Torfason et al. , “Towards image understanding from deep compression without decoding,” in ICLR , 2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=HkXWCMbRW [14] M. Abedin et al. , “MR-PIPA: An integrated multilevel RRAM (HfOx)-Based processing-in-pixel accelerator,” IEEE Journal on Exploratory Solid-State Computational Devices and Circuits , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 59–67, 2022. [15] H. Xu et al. , “Senputing: An ultra-low-power always-on vision percep-tion chip featuring the deep fusion of sensing and computing,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 1047–1051, 2022. [16] H. Xu et al. , “Utilizing direct photocurrent computation and 2d kernel scheduling to improve in-sensor-processing efficiency,” in 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . IEEE, 2020. [17] A. Roohi et al. , “PiPSim: A behavior-level modeling tool for CNN processing-in-pixel accelerators,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2023. [18] M. Moghadam, A. Masum, S. Aygun, and M. H. Najafi, “Independent and dynamic vector symbolic architecture for hardware-efficient edge ai,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems ,vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1110–1123, 2026. [19] A. Masum, M. Moghadam, M. H. Najafi, B. Unluturk, U. Guler, B. A. Beidleman, and S. Aygun, “Ams-hd: Hyperdimensional computing for real-time and energy-efficient acute mountain sickness detection,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.08916 [20] A. Ding, S. Jeong, X. Liu, H. E. Barkam, T. Das, S. Angizi, N. Bagherzadeh, and M. Imani, “Sensehd: A 40 μw 8-bit accelerator wake-up circuit for always-on smart iot sensor monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , pp. 1–1, 2026. [21] X. Huang, Q. Huang, Z. Yang, M. Zhou, Z. Yan, C. Zhuo, and X. Yin, “Senhdc: A 3-d nand flash-based processing-in-sensor hyperdimensional computing architecture,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Inte-gration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1899–1909, 2025. [22] R. Wang, W. Wen, K. Juretus, and X. Jiao, “Pp-hdc: A privacy-preserving inference framework for hyperdimensional computing,” in 

2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) , 2024, pp. 1–6. [23] S. Zhang, K. Juretus, and X. Jiao, “Exploring hyperdimensional com-puting robustness against hardware errors,” IEEE Transactions on Com-puters , vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 1963–1977, 2025. [24] D. Kleyko, D. Rachkovskij, E. Osipov, and A. Rahimi, “A survey on hyperdimensional computing aka vector symbolic architectures, part ii: Applications, cognitive models, and challenges,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 9, Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3558000 [25] A. Burrello, K. Schindler, L. Benini, and A. Rahimi, “Hyperdimensional computing with local binary patterns: One-shot learning of seizure onset and identification of ictogenic brain regions using short-time ieeg recordings,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 601–613, 2020. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 13 

[26] S. Aygun and M. Hassan Najafi, “Sobol sequence optimization for hardware-efficient vector symbolic architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 937–950, 2025. [27] K. He et al. , “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2016, pp. 770–778. [28] Z. Liu et al. , “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-ference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 10 012–10 022. [29] E. Agustsson et al. , “Soft-to-hard vector quantization for end-to-end learning compressible representations,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [30] B. Jacob et al. , “Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018, pp. 2704–2713. [31] Y. Bengio et al. , “Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 ,2013. [32] Z. Li and Q. Gu, “I-vit: Integer-only quantization for efficient vision transformer inference,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 17 065–17 075. [33] D. A. Huffman, “A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy codes,” Proceedings of the IRE , vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 1098–1101, 1952. [34] E. Fossum, “CMOS image sensors: electronic camera-on-a-chip,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices , vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1689–1698, 1997. [35] S. Kawahito, “Survey of column-parallel ADC architectures for CMOS image sensors,” IEICE Transactions on Electronics , vol. 101, no. 8, pp. 53–61, 2018. [36] M. A.-A. Kaiser, G. Datta, S. Sarkar, S. Kundu, Z. Yin, M. Garg, A. P. Jacob, P. A. Beerel, and A. R. Jaiswal, “Technology-circuit-algorithm tri-design for processing-in-pixel-in-memory (p2m),” in Proceedings of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2023 , New York, NY, USA, 2023, p. 613–618. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3583781.3590235 [37] P. Vivet et al. , “A 220GOPS 96-Core processor with 6 chiplets 3D-Stacked on an active interposer offering 0.6ns/mm latency, 3Tb/s/mm 2 Inter-Chiplet Interconnects and 156mW/mm 2 at 82%-Peak-Efficiency DC-DC Converters,” in 2020 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference - (ISSCC) , 2020, pp. 46–48. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSCC19947.2020.9062927 [38] S. Choi et al. , “A 3.0 Gsymbol/s/lane MIPI C-PHY receiver with adaptive level-dependent equalizer for mobile CMOS image sensor,” Sensors , vol. 21, no. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/s21155197 [39] I. Kuon and J. Rose, “Measuring the gap between fpgas and asics,” in 

Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/SIGDA 14th international symposium on Field programmable gate arrays , 2006, pp. 21–30. [40] M. Hameed, H. Shakor, and I. Razak, “Low power text compression for huffman coding using altera fpga with power management controller,” in 2018 1st International Scientific Conference of Engineering Sciences-3rd Scientific Conference of Engineering Science (ISCES) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 18–23. [41] A. Chowdhery et al. , “Visual wake words dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05721 , 2019. [42] Y. Feng et al. , “Real-time gaze tracking with event-driven eye seg-mentation,” in 2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 399–408. [43] J. Zhang et al. , “A hand pose tracking benchmark from stereo matching,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) .IEEE, 2017, pp. 982–986. [44] S. Han et al. , “Megatrack: monochrome egocentric articulated hand-tracking for virtual reality,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) ,vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 87–1, 2020. [45] C. Palmero et al. , “Openeds2020: Open eyes dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03876 , 2020. 

VIII. B IOGRAPHY SECTION 

Chengwei Zhou received his B.E. degree in Au-tomation and M.Sc. degree in Electrical and Com-puter Engineering. He is currently a second-year Ph.D. student in Computer Engineering at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, USA, where he works as a graduate research assistant under the supervision of Dr. Gourav Datta. He was se-lected as a DAC 2026 Young Fellow and has pub-lished in top-tier conferences and journals, including ICML, DAC, ICCAD, ICASSP, BioCAS, GLSVLSI, ISVLSI, and IEEE TCAS-II. He actively serves as a reviewer for leading AI and EDA conferences, including ICLR, ICML (Golden Reviewer Award), NeurIPS, and ICCAD. His research interests include in-sensor computing, hardware–software co-design, and efficient machine learning models (including LLM/VLM) for edge intelligence. 

Abu Kaisar Mohammad Masum (S’25) received the B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineer-ing from Daffodil International University, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2020, and the M.S. degree in Com-puter Science from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, USA. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate in Computer Science at the Uni-versity of Louisiana at Lafayette, specializing in quantum machine learning and emerging comput-ing. He was selected as a DAC Young Fellow in 2025 and was a winner of the NASA Beyond the Algorithm Challenge. His research has been published in leading venues, including DAC, DATE, ISLPED, AAAI, TBME, TVLSI, Nature Portfolio, ESL, ISCAS, QCE, ICCD, GLSVLSI, and MWSCAS. His research interests include quantum computing, hyperdimensional computing, hardware-aware AI, and emerging computing systems. He currently serves as the Secretary of the IEEE Computer Society Lafayette Section and is a Student Member of the IEEE. 

Xuming Chen received the M.S. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2025. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Sys-tems Engineering at Case Western Reserve Univer-sity, Cleveland, OH, USA, under the supervision of Prof. Gourav Datta. He was selected as a DAC Young Fellow and has authored papers published at DAC and ICCAD in 2026. His research interests include algorithm–hardware co-design for efficient AI systems, hardware-aware machine learning, and emerging computing paradigms, with an emphasis on photonic computing, in-memory computing, and edge AI acceleration. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 14 

Mehran Moghadam (S’22) received the B.Sc. de-gree in Computer Engineering, and M.Sc. degree in 

Computer Systems Architecture from the University of Isfahan, Iran, in 2010 and 2016. He graduated as one of the top-ranking students in both programs. In 2022, he began his Ph.D. studies in Computer Engi-neering at the School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, USA. In 2024, he transferred to the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA, to continue pursuing his Ph.D. in Computer Engineering. He became a finalist in the ACM SIGBED Student Research Competition (SRC) at ESWEEK and ICCAD in 2024 and was selected as a Young Fellow in DAC 2024 and 2026. Mehran received the Best Paper Award at ISLPED’26. His research interests include emerging and unconventional computing paradigms, such as energy-efficient stochastic computing models, real-time and highly-accurate hyperdimensional computing systems, bit-stream processing, robust in-memory arithmetic computation, and low-power in/near-sensor computing designs for edge AI. 

Arnab Sanyal received a B.Tech. degree in Electri-cal Engineering and an M.Tech. degree in Instru-mentation and Signal Processing from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, WB, India, in 2017, and two M.S. degrees in Computer Science and Electrical Engineering from the Univer-sity of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2020. He is currently a Doctoral Student with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, and serves concurrently as a Senior Machine Learning Engineer at General Motors. His research has been published in leading venues, including IEEE ICASSP and ISVLSI. He has been adjudicated for an O-1 visa (Individuals with Extraordinary Ability or Achievement) by the United States government. His research interests include energy-efficient and robust machine learning algorithms for generative AI edge applications, approximate computations, and algorithm-architecture co-design for neural networks. 

Md Abdullah-Al Kaiser is an Analog IC Design Engineer at Apple. He earned his Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 2025. Prior to his Ph.D., he earned his M.S. in Electrical and Computer Engi-neering from the University of Southern California (2022). During his Ph.D., he received several pres-tigious honors, including the Harold Peterson Out-standing Dissertation Award, the DATE Travel Grant Award (2025), and the DAC Young Fellow Award (2024). He was also recognized with the Jenny Wang Excellence in Teaching Award (2024), the Charles Weber Teaching Award (2023), and the USC Annenberg Graduate Fellowship (2019–2023). Kaiser has authored more than 25 peer-reviewed publications in leading journals and conferences, including IEDM, the Design Automation Conference (DAC), npj Unconventional Computing, npj Nanophotonics, Frontiers, ICASSP, GLVLSI, and others. His research focuses on analog and mixed-signal integrated circuit design, in-memory and in-sensor computing, photonic computing, neuromorphic computing, and device-circuit-algorithm co-design to advance next-generation computing systems. 

Sreetama Sarkar is a fourth-year Ph.D. student in the Department of Electrical and Computer En-gineering at the University of Southern California (USC), where her research focuses on energy ef-ficiency and trustworthiness in multimodal founda-tion models. Before this, she completed a Master’s degree from the Technical University of Munich and a Bachelor’s degree from the National Institute of Technology Durgapur, India. During her Ph.D., she has completed research internships at Samsung Research America and Dolby Labs. She has authored 20+ peer-reviewed publications, including 8 first-author papers, in top venues such as EMNLP, CVPR, WACV, DAC, and ICCAD. Her work has been recognized through several honors at USC, including the WISE Graduate Merit Award (2026), the Annenberg Endowed Fellowship (2024), and the MHI Fellowship (2022). She received the 3rd place at the DAC Ph.D. Forum (2026) and has been invited to participate in the 13th Heidelberg Laureate Forum (2026). 

M. Hassan Najafi (S’15-M’18-SM’23) received the B.Sc. degree in Computer Engineering from the Uni-versity of Isfahan, Iran, the M.Sc. degree in Com-puter Architecture from the University of Tehran, Iran, and the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, USA, in 2011, 2014, and 2018, respectively. He was an Assistant Professor at the School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, USA, from 2018 to 2024. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Department at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. His research interests include stochastic and approximate computing, unary processing, in-memory computing, and hyperdimensional computing. He has authored/co-authored more than 120 peer-reviewed papers and has been granted 12 U.S. patents, with more pending. Dr. Najafi received the NSF CAREER Award in 2024, the Best Paper Award at GLSVLSI’23 and ICCD’17, the Best Poster Awards at GLSVLSI’24 and DCAS’26, the 2018 EDAA Outstanding Dissertation Award, and the Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship from the University of Minnesota. He has been an editor for the IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems and a Technical Program Committee Member for many EDA conferences. Dr. Najafi is a Senior Member of IEEE and a Senior Member of the U.S. National Academy of Inventors (NAI). 

Sercan Aygun (S’09-M’22-SM’24) received a B.Sc. degree in Electrical & Electronics Engineering and a double major in Computer Engineering from Es-kisehir Osmangazi University, Turkey, in 2013. He completed his M.Sc. degree in Electronics Engineer-ing from Istanbul Technical University in 2015 and a second M.Sc. degree in Computer Engineering from Anadolu University in 2016. Dr. Aygun received his Ph.D. in Electronics Engineering from Istanbul Technical University in 2022. Dr. Aygun received the Best Scientific Research Award of the ACM SIGBED Student Research Competition (SRC) ESWEEK 2022, the Best Paper Award at GLSVLSI’23, and the Best Poster Awards at GLSVLSI’24 & DCAS’26. Dr. Aygun’s Ph.D. work was recognized with the Best Scientific Application Ph.D. Award by the Turkish Electronic Manufacturers Association and was also ranked first nationwide in the Science and Engineering Ph.D. Thesis Awards by the Turkish Academy of Sciences. He is currently an Assistant Professor at the School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, USA. He works on tiny machine learning and emerging computing, including stochastic and hyperdimensional computing. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. X, NO. X, XXXX 2026 15 

Dr. Gourav Datta is an Assistant Professor with the ECSE Department of Case Western Reserve University (CWRU). Before that, he was an Applied Scientist at Amazon AGI, where he contributed to enhancing the video understanding capabilities of Amazon Nova, a next-generation foundation model. He obtained his PhD degree from University of Southern California in 2023. His research inter-ests include energy and latency efficient algorithm-hardware co-design for machine learning at the edge. During his PhD tenure, he received the USC Viterbi School of Engineering’s highest achievement award, The 2024 William Ballhaus Best PhD Dissertation Award, the IEEE Graduate Fellowship on Applied Superconductivity 2022, the best Research Assistant (RA) award from USC ECE, and the Annenberg fellowship. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed papers in top-tier venues including Nature Scientific Reports, Frontiers in Neuroscience, ICLR, ECCV, TCAS-I, DATE, WACV, among others, and received a best paper award nomination at VLSI-SoC 2022. Lastly, his research on in-sensor computing has been highlighted multiple times by Edge Impulse, a leading semiconductor IP company for TinyML, and USC Viterbi School of Engineering.